

Guidelines for Infection Control in Dental Health-Care Settings 
--- 2003

 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail.

Guidelines for Infection Control in Dental Health-Care Settings 
--- 2003

 Prepared by 

 William G. Kohn, D.D.S.1 

 Amy S. Collins, M.P.H.1 

 Jennifer L. Cleveland, D.D.S.1 

 Jennifer A. Harte, D.D.S.2 

 Kathy J. Eklund, M.H.P.3 

 Dolores M. Malvitz, Dr.P.H.1 

 1Division of Oral Health 

 National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, CDC 

 2United States Air Force Dental Investigation Service 

 Great Lakes, Illinois 

 3The Forsyth Institute 

 Boston, Massachusetts

The material in this report originated in the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, James S. Marks, M.D., M.P.H., Director; and the Division of Oral Health, William R. Maas, D.D.S., M.P.H., Director.

Summary

 This report consolidates previous recommendations and adds new ones for infection control in dental 
settings. Recommendations are provided regarding 1) educating and protecting dental health-care personnel; 2) preventing 
transmission of bloodborne pathogens; 3) hand hygiene; 4) personal protective equipment; 5) contact dermatitis and latex hypersensitivity; 
6) sterilization and disinfection of patient-care items; 7) environmental infection control; 8) dental unit waterlines, biofilm, and water quality; and 9) special considerations (e.g., dental handpieces and other devices, radiology, parenteral medications, oral surgical procedures, and dental laboratories). These recommendations were developed in collaboration with and after review by authorities on infection control from CDC and other public agencies, academia, and private and professional organizations. 
Introduction

 This report consolidates recommendations for preventing and controlling infectious diseases and managing personnel 
health and safety concerns related to infection control in dental settings. This report 1) updates and revises previous CDC recommendations regarding infection control in dental settings 
(1,2); 2) incorporates relevant infection-control measures 
from other CDC guidelines; and 3) discusses concerns not addressed in previous recommendations for dentistry. These updates 
and additional topics include the following:

application of standard precautions rather than universal precautions;
work restrictions for health-care personnel (HCP) infected with or occupationally exposed to infectious diseases;
management of occupational exposures to bloodborne pathogens, including postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) for 
work exposures to hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV); and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV); selection and use of devices with features designed to prevent sharps injury;
hand-hygiene products and surgical hand antisepsis;
contact dermatitis and latex hypersensitivity;
sterilization of unwrapped instruments;
dental water-quality concerns (e.g., dental unit waterline biofilms; delivery of water of acceptable biological quality 
for patient care; usefulness of flushing waterlines; use of sterile irrigating solutions for oral surgical procedures; handling 

of community boil-water advisories);
dental radiology;
aseptic technique for parenteral medications;
preprocedural mouth rinsing for patients;
oral surgical procedures;

laser/electrosurgery plumes;
tuberculosis (TB);

Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) and other prion-related diseases;
infection-control program evaluation; and
research considerations.

 These guidelines were developed by CDC staff members in collaboration with other authorities on infection control. 
Draft documents were reviewed by other federal agencies and professional organizations from the fields of dental health care, public health, and hospital epidemiology and infection control. A 
Federal Register notice elicited public comments that were considered 
in the decision-making process. Existing guidelines and published research pertinent to dental infection-control principles and practices were reviewed. Wherever possible, recommendations are based on data from well-designed scientific studies. However, only a limited number of studies have characterized risk factors and the effectiveness of prevention measures 

for infections associated with dental health-care practices.

Some infection-control practices routinely used by health-care practitioners cannot be rigorously examined for ethical or logistical reasons. In the absence of scientific evidence for such practices, certain recommendations are based on 
strong theoretical rationale, suggestive evidence, or opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or committee reports. In addition, some recommendations are derived from federal regulations. No recommendations 
are offered for practices for which insufficient scientific evidence or lack of consensus supporting their effectiveness exists. 
Background

 In the United States, an estimated 9 million persons work in health-care professions, including approximately 
168,000 dentists, 112,000 registered dental hygienists, 218,000 dental 

assistants (3), and 53,000 dental laboratory technicians 
(4). In this report, dental health-care personnel (DHCP) refers to all paid and unpaid personnel in the dental health-care setting who might be occupationally exposed to infectious materials, including body substances and contaminated supplies, 
equipment, environmental surfaces, water, or air. DHCP include dentists, dental hygienists, dental assistants, dental laboratory technicians (in-office and commercial), students and trainees, contractual personnel, and other persons not directly involved in patient care but potentially exposed to infectious agents (e.g., administrative, clerical, housekeeping, maintenance, or volunteer 
personnel). Recommendations in this report are designed 
to prevent or reduce potential for disease transmission from patient to 
DHCP, from DHCP to patient, and from patient to patient. Although these guidelines focus mainly on outpatient, ambulatory 
dental health-care settings, the recommended infection-control practices are applicable to all settings in which dental treatment 
is provided.

Dental patients and DHCP can be exposed to pathogenic microorganisms including cytomegalovirus (CMV), HBV, 
HCV, herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2, HIV, Mycobacterium 

tuberculosis, staphylococci, streptococci, and other viruses and 
bacteria that colonize or infect the oral cavity and respiratory tract. These organisms can be transmitted in dental settings through 1) direct contact with blood, oral fluids, or other patient materials; 2) indirect contact with contaminated 
objects (e.g., instruments, equipment, or environmental surfaces); 3) contact of conjunctival, nasal, or oral mucosa with droplets (e.g., spatter) containing microorganisms generated from an infected person and propelled a short distance (e.g., by 
coughing, sneezing, or talking); and 4) inhalation of airborne microorganisms that can remain suspended in the air for long periods (5).

Infection through any of these routes requires that all of the following conditions be present:

a pathogenic organism of sufficient virulence and in 
adequate numbers to cause disease;
a reservoir or source that allows the pathogen to survive and multiply (e.g., blood);
a mode of transmission from the source to the host;
a portal of entry through which the pathogen can enter the host; and
a susceptible host (i.e., one who is not immune).

 Occurrence of these events provides the chain of infection 

(6). Effective infection-control strategies prevent disease transmission by interrupting one or more links in the chain. 

Previous CDC recommendations regarding infection control for dentistry focused primarily on the risk of transmission 
of bloodborne pathogens among DHCP and patients and use of universal precautions to reduce that risk 
(1,2,7,8). Universal precautions were based on the concept that all blood and body fluids that might be contaminated with blood should be treated as infectious because patients with bloodborne infections can be asymptomatic or unaware they are infected 
(9,10). Preventive 

practices used to reduce blood exposures, particularly percutaneous exposures, include 1) careful handling of sharp 
instruments, 2) use of rubber dams to minimize blood spattering; 3) handwashing; and 4) use of protective barriers (e.g., gloves, masks, protective eyewear, and gowns).

The relevance of universal precautions to other aspects of disease transmission was recognized, and in 1996, 
CDC expanded the concept and changed the term to 
standard precautions. Standard precautions integrate and expand the elements 
of universal precautions into a standard of care designed to protect HCP and patients from pathogens that can be spread by 
blood or any other body fluid, excretion, or secretion 
(11). Standard precautions apply to contact with 1) blood; 2) all body 
fluids, secretions, and excretions (except sweat), regardless of whether they contain blood; 3) nonintact skin; and 4) 
mucous membranes. Saliva has always been considered a 
potentially infectious material in dental infection control; thus, no 
operational difference exists in clinical dental practice 

between universal precautions and standard precautions.

In addition to standard precautions, other measures (e.g., expanded or transmission-based precautions) might be necessary 
to prevent potential spread of certain diseases (e.g., TB, influenza, and varicella) that are transmitted through airborne, droplet, 
or contact transmission (e.g., sneezing, coughing, and contact with skin) 
(11). When acutely ill with these diseases, patients 
do not usually seek routine dental outpatient care. Nonetheless, a general understanding of precautions for diseases transmitted 
by all routes is critical because 1) some DHCP are hospital-based or work part-time in hospital settings; 
2) patients infected with these diseases might seek urgent treatment at outpatient dental offices; and 3) DHCP might 
become infected with these diseases. Necessary transmission-based precautions might include patient placement (e.g., isolation), adequate room ventilation, respiratory protection (e.g., N-95 masks) for DHCP, or postponement of nonemergency dental procedures.

DHCP should be familiar also with the hierarchy of controls that categorizes and prioritizes prevention strategies 
(12). For bloodborne pathogens, engineering controls that eliminate or isolate the hazard (e.g., puncture-resistant sharps containers or needle-retraction devices) are the primary strategies for protecting DHCP and patients. Where engineering controls are 

not available or appropriate, work-practice controls that result in safer behaviors (e.g., one-hand needle recapping or not using fingers for cheek retraction while using sharp 
instruments or suturing), and use of personal protective equipment (PPE) 

(e.g., protective eyewear, gloves, and mask) can prevent exposure (13). In addition, administrative controls (e.g., policies, 
procedures, and enforcement measures targeted at reducing the risk of exposure to infectious persons) are a priority for certain pathogens (e.g., M. tuberculosis), particularly those spread by airborne or droplet routes.

Dental practices should develop a written infection-control program to prevent or reduce the risk of disease 
transmission. Such a program should include establishment and implementation of policies, procedures, and practices (in conjunction with selection and use of technologies and products) to prevent work-related injuries and illnesses among DHCP as well as health-care--associated infections among patients. The program should embody principles of infection control 
and occupational health, reflect current science, and adhere to relevant federal, state, and local regulations and statutes. 
An infection-control coordinator (e.g., dentist or other DHCP) knowledgeable or willing to be trained should be 
assigned responsibility for coordinating the program. The effectiveness of the infection-control program should be evaluated on a day-to-day basis and over time to help ensure that policies, procedures, and practices are useful, efficient, and successful 

(see Program Evaluation).

Although the infection-control coordinator remains responsible for overall management of the program, creating 
and maintaining a safe work environment ultimately requires the commitment and accountability of all DHCP. This report is designed to provide guidance to DHCP for preventing disease transmission in dental health-care settings, for promoting a safe working environment, and for assisting dental practices in 

developing and implementing infection-control programs. These 
programs should be followed in addition to practices and procedures for worker protection required by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration's (OSHA) standards for occupational 

exposure to bloodborne pathogens (13), including instituting controls to protect employees from exposure 
to blood or other potentially infectious materials (OPIM), and requiring implementation of 
a written exposure-control plan, annual employee training, HBV vaccinations, and postexposure follow-up 
(13). Interpretations and enforcement procedures are available to help DHCP apply this OSHA standard in practice 
(14). Also, manufacturer's Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) should be consulted regarding correct procedures for handling or working with hazardous chemicals (15).

Previous Recommendations

 This report includes relevant infection-control measures from the following previously published CDC guidelines 
and recommendations:

CDC. Guideline for disinfection and sterilization in health-care facilities: recommendations of CDC and the 

Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR (in press).
CDC. Guidelines for environmental infection control in health-care facilities: recommendations of CDC and 
the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 2003;52(No. RR-10).
CDC. Guidelines for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related infections. MMWR 2002;51(No. RR-10).
CDC. Guideline for hand hygiene in health-care settings: recommendations of the Healthcare Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee and the HICPAC/SHEA/APIC/IDSA Hand Hygiene Task Force. MMWR 2002;51 (No. RR-16).
CDC. Updated U.S. Public Health Service guidelines for the management of occupational exposures to HBV, HCV, 
and HIV and recommendations for postexposure prophylaxis. MMWR 2001;50(No. RR-11).
Mangram AJ, Horan TC, Pearson ML, Silver LC, Jarvis WR, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory 
Committee. Guideline for prevention of surgical site infection, 1999. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:250--78. Bolyard EA, Tablan OC, Williams WW, Pearson ML, Shapiro CN, Deitchman SD, Hospital Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for infection control in health care personnel, 1998. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:289--354.
CDC. Immunization of health-care workers: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices (ACIP) and the Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-18). 
Rutala WA, Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc. APIC guideline for selection and 
use of disinfectants. Am J Infect Control 1996;24:313--42.
Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for isolation precautions in 
hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:53--80.
Larson EL, 1992, 1993, and 1994 Guidelines Committee. APIC guideline for handwashing and hand antisepsis in 
health-care settings. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:251--69.

CDC. Guidelines for preventing the transmission of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis in health-care facilities, 1994. MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-13).

CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to 
patients during exposure-prone invasive procedures. MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-8).
Garner JS. CDC guideline for prevention of surgical wound infections, 1985. Supersedes guideline for prevention 
of surgical wound infections published in 1982. (Originally published in November 1985). Revised. 
Infect Control 1986;7:193--200.
Garner JS, Favero MS. CDC guideline for handwashing and hospital environmental control, 1985. Infect 
Control 1986;7:231--43.

Selected Definitions

 Alcohol-based hand rub: An alcohol-containing preparation designed for reducing the number of viable microorganisms on the hands.

Antimicrobial soap: A detergent containing an antiseptic agent.

Antiseptic: A germicide used on skin or living tissue for the purpose of inhibiting or destroying microorganisms (e.g., alcohols, chlorhexidine, chlorine, hexachlorophene, iodine, chloroxylenol [PCMX], quaternary ammonium compounds, 

and triclosan).

Bead sterilizer: A device using glass beads 1.2--1.5 mm 
diameter and temperatures 
217ºC--232ºC for brief exposures (e.g., 
45 seconds) to inactivate microorganisms. (This term is actually a misnomer because it has not been cleared by the Food and Drug Administration [FDA] as a sterilizer).

Bioburden: Microbiological load (i.e., number of viable 

organisms in or on an object or surface) or organic material on 
a surface or object before decontamination, or sterilization. Also known as bioload or microbial load.

Colony-forming unit (CFU): The minimum number (i.e., tens of millions) of separable cells on the surface of or in semisolid agar medium that give rise to a visible colony of progeny. CFUs can consist of pairs, chains, clusters, or as single cells and are often expressed as colony-forming units per milliliter (CFUs/mL).

Decontamination: Use of physical or chemical means to 

remove, inactivate, or destroy pathogens on a surface or item so 
that they are no longer capable of transmitting infectious particles and the surface or item is rendered safe for handling, use, 
or disposal.

Dental treatment water: Nonsterile water used during dental treatment, including irrigation of nonsurgical operative sites and cooling of high-speed rotary and ultrasonic instruments.

Disinfectant: A chemical agent used on inanimate objects (e.g., floors, walls, or sinks) to destroy virtually all recognized pathogenic microorganisms, but not necessarily all microbial forms (e.g., bacterial endospores). The U.S. 

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) groups disinfectants on the basis of whether the product label claims limited, general, or hospital disinfectant capabilities.

Disinfection: Destruction of pathogenic and other kinds of microorganisms by physical or chemical means. Disinfection is less lethal than sterilization, because it destroys the majority of recognized pathogenic microorganisms, but not necessarily 
all microbial forms (e.g., bacterial spores). Disinfection does not ensure the degree of safety associated with sterilization processes. 
Droplet nuclei: Particles <5 µm in diameter formed by dehydration of airborne droplets containing microorganisms that can remain suspended in the air for long periods of time.

Droplets: Small particles of moisture (e.g., spatter) generated when a person coughs or sneezes, or when water is converted 

to a fine mist by an aerator or shower head. These particles, intermediate in size between drops and droplet nuclei, can 
contain infectious microorganisms and tend to quickly settle from the air such that risk of disease transmission is usually limited to persons in close proximity to the droplet source.

Endotoxin: The lipopolysaccharide of gram-negative bacteria, the toxic character of which resides in the lipid 
protein. Endotoxins can produce pyrogenic reactions in persons 
exposed to their bacterial component.

Germicide: An agent that destroys microorganisms, especially pathogenic organisms. Terms with the same suffix 
(e.g., virucide, fungicide, 

bactericide, tuberculocide, and 
sporicide) indicate agents that destroy the specific microorganism identified 
by the prefix. Germicides can be used to inactivate microorganisms in or on living tissue (i.e., antiseptics) or on environmental surfaces (i.e., disinfectants).

Hand hygiene: General term that applies to handwashing, antiseptic handwash, antiseptic hand rub, or surgical hand antisepsis.

Health-care--associated infection: Any infection associated with a medical or surgical intervention. The term health-care--associated replaces 

nosocomial, which is limited to adverse infectious outcomes occurring in hospitals.

Hepatitis B immune globulin 
(HBIG): Product used for prophylaxis against HBV infection. HBIG is prepared from 
plasma containing high titers of hepatitis B surface antibody (anti-HBs) and provides protection for 3--6 mos. 
Hepatitis B surface antigen 
(HBsAg): Serologic marker on the surface of HBV detected in high levels during acute or 
chronic hepatitis. The body normally produces antibodies to surface antigen as a normal immune response to infection. 
Hepatitis B e antigen 
(HBeAg): Secreted product of the nucleocapsid gene of HBV found in serum during acute and 
chronic HBV infection. Its presence indicates that the virus is replicating and serves as a marker of increased infectivity. 
Hepatitis B surface antibody 
(anti-HBs): Protective antibody against HBsAg. Presence in the blood can indicate past 

infection with, and immunity to, HBV, or immune response from hepatitis B vaccine.

Heterotrophic bacteria: Those bacteria requiring an organic carbon source for growth (i.e., deriving energy and carbon from organic compounds).

High-level disinfection: Disinfection process that inactivates vegetative bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi, and viruses but not necessarily high numbers of bacterial spores. FDA further 

defines a high-level disinfectant as a sterilant used for a 
shorter contact time.

Hospital disinfectant: Germicide registered by EPA for use on inanimate objects in hospitals, clinics, dental offices, and other medical-related facilities. Efficacy is demonstrated against 
Salmonella choleraesuis, Staphylococcus 

aureus, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Iatrogenic: Induced inadvertently by HCP, medical (including dental) treatment, or diagnostic procedures. Used particularly in reference to an infectious disease or other complication of treatment.

Immunization: Process by which a person becomes immune, or protected against a disease. Vaccination is defined as the process of administering a killed or weakened infectious 

organism or a toxoid; however, vaccination does not always result 
in immunity.

Implantable device: Device placed into a surgically or naturally formed cavity of the human body and intended 
to remain there for >30 days.

Independent water reservoir: Container used to hold water or other solutions and supply it to handpieces and air and water syringes attached to a dental unit. The independent reservoir, which isolates the unit from the public water system, can be provided as original equipment or as a retrofitted device.

Intermediate-level disinfection: Disinfection process that inactivates vegetative bacteria, the majority of fungi, 
mycobacteria, and the majority of viruses (particularly enveloped viruses) but not bacterial spores.

Intermediate-level disinfectant: Liquid chemical germicide registered with EPA as a hospital disinfectant and with a label claim of potency as tuberculocidal (Appendix A).

Latex: Milky white fluid extracted from the rubber tree 

Hevea brasiliensis that contains the rubber material 
cis-1,4 polyisoprene.

Low-level disinfection: Process that inactivates the majority of vegetative bacteria, certain fungi, and certain viruses, but cannot be relied on to inactivate resistant microorganisms (e.g., mycobacteria or bacterial spores).

Low-level disinfectant: Liquid chemical germicide registered with EPA as a hospital disinfectant. OSHA requires 

low-level hospital disinfectants also to have a label claim for potency against HIV and HBV if used for disinfecting clinical contact surfaces (Appendix A).

Microfilter: Membrane filter used to trap microorganisms suspended in water. Filters are usually installed on dental unit waterlines as a retrofit device. Microfiltration commonly 

occurs at a filter pore size of 0.03--10 µm. Sediment filters 
commonly found in dental unit water regulators have pore sizes of 20--90 µm and do not function as microbiological 
filters.

Nosocomial: Infection acquired in a hospital as a result of medical care.

Occupational exposure: Reasonably anticipated skin, eye, mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with blood or OPIM 
that can result from the performance of an employee's duties.

OPIM: Other potentially infectious materials. OPIM is an OSHA term that refers to 1) body fluids including semen, 
vaginal secretions, cerebrospinal fluid, synovial fluid, pleural fluid, pericardial fluid, peritoneal fluid, amniotic fluid, saliva in dental procedures; any body fluid visibly contaminated with blood; and all body fluids in situations where differentiating 
between body fluids is difficult or impossible; 2) any unfixed tissue or organ (other than intact skin) from a human (living or dead); and 3) HIV-containing cell or tissue cultures, organ cultures; HIV- or HBV-containing culture medium or other solutions; 
and blood, organs, or other tissues from experimental animals infected with HIV or HBV.

Parenteral: Means of piercing mucous membranes or skin barrier through such events as needlesticks, human bites, cuts, 
and abrasions.

Persistent activity: Prolonged or extended activity that prevents or inhibits proliferation or survival of microorganisms after application of a product. This activity can be demonstrated by sampling a site minutes or hours after application 

and demonstrating bacterial antimicrobial effectiveness when compared with a baseline level. Previously, this property 
was sometimes termed residual activity.

Prion: Protein particle lacking nucleic acid that has been implicated as the cause of certain neurodegenerative diseases (e.g., scrapie, CJD, and bovine spongiform encephalopathy [BSE]).

Retraction: Entry of oral fluids and microorganisms into waterlines through negative water pressure. 
Seroconversion: The change of a serological test from negative to positive indicating the development of antibodies in response to infection or immunization.

Sterile: Free from all living microorganisms; usually described as a probability (e.g., the probability of a 
surviving microorganism being 1 in 1 million).

Sterilization: Use of a physical or chemical procedure to destroy all microorganisms including substantial numbers of resistant bacterial spores.

Surfactants: Surface-active agents that reduce surface tension and help cleaning by loosening, emulsifying, and holding soil in suspension, to be more readily rinsed away.

Ultrasonic cleaner: Device that removes debris by a process called cavitation, in which waves of acoustic energy are propagated in aqueous solutions to disrupt the bonds that hold particulate matter to surfaces.

Vaccination: See immunization.

Vaccine: Product that induces immunity, therefore protecting the body from the disease. Vaccines are administered 
through needle injections, by mouth, and by aerosol.

Washer-disinfector: Automatic unit that cleans and thermally disinfects instruments, by using a high-temperature cycle rather than a chemical bath.

Wicking: Absorption of a liquid by capillary action along a thread or through the material (e.g., penetration of 
liquids through undetected holes in a glove).

Review of Science Related to Dental Infection Control

Personnel Health Elements of an Infection-Control Program

 A protective health component for DHCP is an integral part of a dental practice infection-control program. The 
objectives are to educate DHCP regarding the principles of infection control, identify work-related infection risks, institute preventive measures, and ensure prompt exposure management and medical follow-up. Coordination between the dental 

practice's infection-control coordinator and other qualified health-care professionals is necessary to provide DHCP with 
appropriate services. Dental programs in institutional settings, (e.g., hospitals, health centers, and educational institutions) can coordinate with departments that provide personnel health services. However, the majority of dental practices are in ambulatory, private settings that do not have licensed medical staff and facilities to provide complete on-site health service programs. In 

such settings, the infection-control coordinator should 
establish programs that arrange for site-specific 
infection-control services from external health-care facilities and providers before DHCP are placed at risk for exposure. Referral arrangements can be made with qualified health-care professionals in an occupational health program of a hospital, with educational institutions, 

or with health-care facilities that offer personnel health services.

Education and Training

Personnel are more likely to comply with an 
infection-control program and exposure-control plan if they understand 
its rationale (5,13,16). Clearly written policies, procedures, and guidelines can help ensure consistency, efficiency, and effective coordination of activities. Personnel subject to occupational exposure should receive infection-control training on initial assignment, when new tasks or procedures affect their occupational exposure, and at a minimum, annually (13). Education and training should be appropriate to the assigned duties of specific DHCP (e.g., techniques to prevent cross-contamination or instrument sterilization). For DHCP who perform tasks or procedures likely to result in 
occupational exposure to infectious agents, training should include 1) a 

description of their exposure risks; 2) review of prevention 
strategies and infection-control policies and procedures; 3) discussion regarding how to manage work-related illness and 
injuries, including PEP; and 4) review of work restrictions for the 
exposure or infection. Inclusion of DHCP with 
minimal exposure risks (e.g., administrative employees) in education and training programs might enhance facilitywide understanding of infection-control principles and the importance of the program. Educational materials should be appropriate in content 
and vocabulary for each person's educational level, literacy, and language, as well as be consistent with existing federal, state, and local regulations (5,13).

Immunization Programs

DHCP are at risk for exposure to, and possible infection with, infectious organisms. Immunizations substantially 

reduce both the number of DHCP susceptible to these diseases and the potential for disease transmission to other DHCP and patients (5,17). Thus, immunizations are an essential part of prevention and infection-control programs for DHCP, and a comprehensive immunization policy should be implemented for all dental health-care facilities 
(17,18). The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) provides national guidelines for immunization of HCP, which includes DHCP (17). Dental practice immunization policies should incorporate current state and federal regulations as well 
as recommendations from the U.S. Public Health Service and professional organizations 
(17) (Appendix B).

On the basis of documented health-care--associated transmission, HCP are considered to be at substantial risk 
for acquiring or transmitting hepatitis B, influenza, measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella. All of these diseases are 
vaccine-preventable. ACIP recommends that all HCP be vaccinated or have documented immunity to these diseases 
(5,17). ACIP does 

not recommend routine immunization of HCP against TB (i.e., inoculation with bacille Calmette-Guérin vaccine) or 

hepatitis A (17). No vaccine exists for HCV. ACIP guidelines also provide recommendations regarding immunization of HCP with special conditions (e.g., pregnancy, HIV infection, or diabetes) 
(5,17).

Immunization of DHCP before they are placed at risk for exposure remains the most efficient and effective use of vaccines in health-care settings. Some educational institutions and infection-control programs provide immunization schedules 

for students and DHCP. OSHA requires that employers make hepatitis B vaccination available to all employees who have potential contact with blood or OPIM. Employers are also required to follow CDC recommendations for vaccinations, evaluation, 
and follow-up procedures (13). Nonpatient-care staff (e.g., administrative or housekeeping) might be included, depending on their potential risk of coming into contact with blood or OPIM. Employers are also required to ensure that employees who 
decline to accept hepatitis B vaccination sign an appropriate declination statement 
(13). DHCP unable or unwilling to be vaccinated 
as required or recommended should be educated regarding their exposure risks, infection-control policies and procedures for 
the facility, and the management of work-related illness and work restrictions (if appropriate) for exposed or infected DHCP.

Exposure Prevention and Postexposure Management

Avoiding exposure to blood and OPIM, as well as protection by immunization, remain primary strategies for 
reducing occupationally acquired infections, but occupational exposures can still occur 
(19). A combination of standard 
precautions, engineering, work practice, and administrative controls is the best means to minimize occupational exposures. Written policies and procedures to facilitate prompt reporting, evaluation, counseling, treatment, and medical follow-up of all 
occupational exposures should be available to all DHCP. Written policies and procedures should be consistent with federal, state, and local requirements addressing education and training, postexposure management, and exposure reporting (see 
Preventing Transmission of Bloodborne Pathogens).

DHCP who have contact with patients can also be exposed to persons with infectious TB, and should have a 

baseline tuberculin skin test (TST), preferably by using a two-step test, at the beginning of employment 
(20). Thus, if an unprotected occupational exposure occurs, TST conversions can be distinguished from positive TST results caused by previous 

exposures (20,21). The facility's level of TB risk will determine the need for routine follow-up TSTs (see Special Considerations). 

Medical Conditions, Work-Related Illness, and Work Restrictions

DHCP are responsible for monitoring their own health status. DHCP who have acute or chronic medical conditions 

that render them susceptible to opportunistic infection should discuss with their personal physicians or other 
qualified authority whether the condition might affect their ability to safely perform their duties. However, under certain circumstances, health-care facility managers might need to exclude DHCP from work or patient contact to prevent further transmission of infection (22). Decisions concerning work restrictions are based on the mode of transmission and the period of infectivity of the disease (5) (Table 1). Exclusion policies should 1) be written, 2) include a statement of authority that defines who can exclude DHCP (e.g., personal physicians), and 3) be clearly communicated through education and training. Policies 
should also encourage DHCP to report illnesses or exposures without jeopardizing wages, benefits, or job status.

With increasing concerns regarding bloodborne pathogens and introduction of universal precautions, use of latex gloves 
among HCP has increased markedly (7,23). Increased use of these gloves has been accompanied by increased reports of allergic reactions to natural rubber latex among HCP, DHCP, and patients 

(24--30), as well as increased reports of irritant and allergic 
contact dermatitis from frequent and repeated use of hand-hygiene products, exposure to chemicals, and glove use.

DHCP should be familiar with the signs and symptoms of latex sensitivity 
(5,31--33). A physician should evaluate 
DHCP exhibiting symptoms of latex allergy, because further exposure could result in a serious allergic reaction. A diagnosis is made through medical history, physical examination, and diagnostic tests. Procedures should be in place for minimizing latex-related health problems among DHCP and patients while protecting them from infectious materials. These procedures should include 1) reducing exposures to latex-containing materials 
by using appropriate work practices, 2) training and educating DHCP, 
3) monitoring symptoms, and 4) substituting nonlatex products where appropriate 
(32) (see Contact Dermatitis and Latex Hypersensitivity).

Maintenance of Records, Data Management, and Confidentiality

The health status of DHCP can be monitored by maintaining records of work-related medical evaluations, screening 

tests, immunizations, exposures, and postexposure management. Such records must be kept in accordance with all applicable state and federal laws. Examples of laws that might apply 
include the Privacy Rule of the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996, 45 CFR 160 and 164, and the OSHA Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne 
Pathogens; Final Rule 29 CFR 1910.1030(h)(1)(i--iv) 
(34,13). The HIPAA Privacy Rule applies to covered entities, including 
certain defined health providers, health-care clearinghouses, and health plans. OSHA requires employers to ensure that certain information contained in employee medical records is 1) kept confidential; 2) not disclosed or reported without the employee's express written consent to any person within or outside the workplace except as required by the OSHA standard; and 3) maintained by the employer for at least the duration of employment plus 30 years. Dental practices that coordinate 

their infection-control program with off-site providers might consult OSHA's Bloodborne Pathogen standard and employee 
Access to Medical and Exposure Records standard, as well as other applicable local, state, and federal laws, to determine a location for storing health records (13,35).

Preventing Transmission of Bloodborne Pathogens

 Although transmission of bloodborne pathogens (e.g., HBV, HCV, and HIV) in dental health-care settings can have 
serious consequences, such transmission is rare. Exposure to 

infected blood can result in transmission from patient to DHCP, 
from DHCP to patient, and from one patient to 
another. The opportunity for transmission is greatest from 
patient to DHCP, who frequently encounter patient blood and blood-contaminated saliva during dental procedures. 
Since 1992, no HIV transmission from DHCP to patients has been reported, and the last HBV transmission from DHCP to patients was reported in 1987. HCV transmission from DHCP to patients has not been reported. The majority of 
DHCP infected with a bloodborne virus do not pose a risk to patients because they do not perform activities meeting the necessary conditions for transmission. For DHCP to pose a risk for bloodborne virus transmission to patients, DHCP must 1) be 
viremic (i.e., have infectious virus circulating in the bloodstream); 2) be injured or have a condition (e.g., weeping dermatitis) that allows direct exposure to their blood or other infectious body fluids; and 3) enable their blood or infectious body fluid to gain direct access to a patient's wound, traumatized tissue, mucous membranes, or similar portal of entry. Although an 
infected DHCP might be viremic, unless the second and third conditions are also met, transmission cannot occur.

The risk of occupational exposure to bloodborne viruses is largely determined by their prevalence in the patient population and the nature and frequency of contact with blood and body fluids through percutaneous or permucosal routes of exposure. The risk of infection after exposure to a bloodborne virus is influenced by inoculum size, route of exposure, and susceptibility of the exposed HCP (12). The majority of 
attention has been placed on the bloodborne pathogens HBV, HCV, and HIV, 
and these pathogens present different levels of risk to DHCP.

Hepatitis B Virus

HBV is a well-recognized occupational risk for HCP 
(36,37). HBV is transmitted by percutaneous or mucosal exposure 
to blood or body fluids of a person with either acute or chronic HBV infection. Persons infected with HBV can transmit the virus for as long as they are HBsAg-positive. The risk of HBV transmission is highly related to the HBeAg status of the source person. In studies of HCP who sustained injuries from needles contaminated with blood containing HBV, the risk 

of developing clinical hepatitis if the blood was positive for both HBsAg and HBeAg was 22%--31%; the risk of 
developing serologic evidence of HBV infection was 37%--62% 
(19). By comparison, the risk of developing clinical hepatitis from 
a needle contaminated with HBsAg-positive, HBeAg-negative blood was 1%--6%, and the risk of developing serologic 
evidence of HBV infection, 23%--37% (38).

Blood contains the greatest proportion of HBV infectious particle titers of all body fluids and is the most critical vehicle 
of transmission in the health-care setting. HBsAg is also found in multiple other body fluids, including breast milk, 
bile, cerebrospinal fluid, feces, nasopharyngeal washings, saliva, semen, sweat, and synovial fluid. However, the majority of 
body fluids are not efficient vehicles for transmission because they contain low quantities of infectious HBV, despite the presence of HBsAg (19). The concentration of HBsAg in body fluids can be 100--1,000-fold greater than the concentration of 
infectious HBV particles (39).

Although percutaneous injuries are among the most efficient modes of HBV transmission, these exposures probably 

account for only a minority of HBV infections among HCP. In multiple investigations of nosocomial hepatitis B outbreaks, 
the majority of infected HCP could not recall an overt percutaneous injury 
(40,41), although in certain studies, approximately 
one third of infected HCP recalled caring for a patient who was HBsAg-positive 
(42,43). In addition, HBV has been 
demonstrated to survive in dried blood at room temperature on environmental surfaces for 
<1 week (44). Thus, HBV infections 
that occur in HCP with no history of nonoccupational exposure or occupational percutaneous injury might have resulted from direct or indirect blood or body fluid exposures that inoculated HBV into cutaneous scratches, abrasions, burns, other lesions, or 
on mucosal surfaces (45--47). The potential for HBV transmission through contact with environmental surfaces has 
been demonstrated in investigations of HBV outbreaks among patients and HCP in hemodialysis units 
(48--50).

Since the early 1980s, occupational infections among HCP have declined because of vaccine use and adherence to 

universal precautions (51). Among U.S. dentists, >90% have been vaccinated, and serologic evidence of past HBV 
infection decreased from prevaccine levels of 14% in 1972 to approximately 9% in 1992 
(52). During 1993--2001, levels remained relatively unchanged (Chakwan Siew, Ph.D., American Dental Association, Chicago, Illinois, personal communication, June 2003). Infection rates can be expected to decline further as vaccination rates remain high among young dentists and as 
older dentists with lower vaccination rates and higher rates of infection retire.

Although the potential for transmission of bloodborne 

infections from DHCP to patients is considered 
limited (53--55), precise risks have not been quantified by carefully designed epidemiologic studies 
(53,56,57). Reports published during 1970--1987 describe nine clusters in which patients were thought to be infected with HBV through treatment by an infected DHCP (58--67). However, transmission of HBV from dentist to patient has not been reported since 1987, 
possibly reflecting such factors as 1) adoption of universal precautions, 2) routine glove use, 3) increased levels of immunity as a 
result of hepatitis B vaccination of DHCP, 4) implementation of the 1991 OSHA bloodborne pathogen standard 
(68), and 5) incomplete ascertainment and reporting. Only one case of patient-to-patient transmission of HBV in the dental setting 
has been documented (CDC, unpublished data, 2003). In this case, appropriate office infection-control procedures were 
being followed, and the exact mechanism of transmission was undetermined.

Because of the high risk of HBV infection among HCP, DHCP who perform tasks that might involve contact with 
blood, blood-contaminated body substances, other body fluids, or sharps should be vaccinated 
(2,13,17,19,69). Vaccination can protect both DHCP and patients from HBV infection and, whenever possible, should be completed when dentists or other DHCP are in training and before they have contact with blood.

Prevaccination serological testing for previous infection is not indicated, although it can be cost-effective where prevalence 

of infection is expected to be high in a group of potential vacinees (e.g., persons who have emigrated from areas with high rates of HBV infection). DHCP should be tested for anti-HBs 1--2 months after completion of the 3-dose vaccination series 
(17). DHCP who do not develop an adequate antibody response (i.e., anti-HBs <10 mIU/mL) to the primary vaccine series 
should complete a second 3-dose vaccine series or be evaluated to determine if they are HBsAg-positive 
(17). Revaccinated persons should be retested for anti-HBs at the completion of the second vaccine series. Approximately half of nonresponders to the primary series will respond to a second 3-dose series. If no antibody response occurs after the second series, testing for 
HBsAg should be performed (17). Persons who prove to be HBsAg-positive should be counseled regarding how to prevent 
HBV transmission to others and regarding the need for medical evaluation. Nonresponders to vaccination who are 
HBsAg-negative should be considered susceptible to HBV infection and should be counseled regarding precautions to prevent HBV 

infection and the need to obtain HBIG prophylaxis for any known or probable parenteral exposure to HBsAg-positive blood. 
Vaccine-induced antibodies decline gradually over time, and 60% of persons who initially respond to vaccination will 
lose detectable antibodies over 12 years. Even so, immunity continues to prevent clinical disease or detectable viral infection (17). Booster doses of vaccine and periodic serologic testing to monitor antibody concentrations after completion of the vaccine series are not necessary for vaccine responders 
(17).

Hepatitis D Virus

An estimated 4% of persons with acute HBV infection are also infected with hepatitis Delta virus (HDV). Discovered 

in 1977, HDV is a defective bloodborne virus requiring the presence of HBV to replicate. Patients coinfected with HBV and HDV have substantially higher mortality rates than those 
infected with HBV alone. Because HDV infection is dependent 
on 

HBV for replication, immunization to prevent HBV infection, through either pre- or postexposure prophylaxis, can 
also prevent HDV infection (70).

Hepatitis C Virus

Hepatitis C virus appears not to be transmitted efficiently through occupational exposures to blood. Follow-up studies of HCP exposed to HCV-infected blood through percutaneous or other sharps injuries have determined a low incidence 

of seroconversion (mean: 1.8%; range, 0%--7%) 
(71--74). One study determined transmission occurred from 
hollow-bore needles but not other sharps 
(72). Although these studies have not documented seroconversion associated with 
mucous membrane or nonintact skin exposure, at least two cases of HCV transmission from a blood splash to the conjunctiva (75,76) and one case of simultaneous transmission of HCV and HIV after nonintact skin exposure have been reported (77).

Data are insufficient to estimate the occupational risk of HCV infection among HCP, but the majority of studies indicate 
the prevalence of HCV infection among dentists, surgeons, and hospital-based HCP is similar to that among the 
general population, approximately 1%--2% 
(78--86). In a study that evaluated risk factors for infection, a history of 
unintentional needlesticks was the only occupational risk factor independently associated with HCV infection 
(80).

No studies of transmission from HCV-infected DHCP to patients have been reported, and the risk for such 
transmission appears limited. Multiple reports have been published describing transmission from HCV-infected surgeons, which apparently occurred during performance of invasive procedures; the overall risk for infection averaged 0.17% 
(87--90).

Human Immunodeficiency Virus

In the United States, the risk of HIV transmission in dental settings is extremely low. As of December 2001, a total of 
57 cases of HIV seroconversion had been documented among HCP, but none among DHCP, after occupational exposure to 
a known HIV-infected source (91). Transmission of HIV to six patients of a single dentist with AIDS has been reported, but the mode of transmission could not be determined 
(2,92,93). As of September 30, 1993, CDC had information regarding 
test results of >22,000 patients of 63 HIV-infected HCP, including 33 dentists or dental students 
(55,93). No additional cases of transmission were documented.

Prospective studies worldwide indicate the average risk of HIV infection after a single percutaneous exposure to 
HIV-infected blood is 0.3% (range: 0.2%--0.5%) 
(94). After an exposure of mucous membranes in the eye, nose, or mouth, the risk 
is approximately 0.1% (76). The precise risk of transmission after skin exposure remains unknown but is believed to be even smaller than that for mucous membrane exposure.

Certain factors affect the risk of HIV transmission after an occupational exposure. Laboratory studies have determined 

if needles that pass through latex gloves are solid rather than hollow-bore, or are of small gauge (e.g., anesthetic 
needles commonly used in dentistry), they transfer less blood 
(36). In a retrospective case-control study of HCP, an increased risk 
for HIV infection was associated with exposure to a relatively large volume of blood, as indicated by a deep injury with a device that was visibly contaminated with the patient's blood, or a procedure that involved a needle placed in a vein or artery 
(95). The risk was also increased if the exposure was to blood from patients with terminal illnesses, possibly reflecting the higher titer of HIV in late-stage AIDS.

Exposure Prevention Methods

Avoiding occupational exposures to blood is the primary way to prevent transmission of HBV, HCV, and HIV, to HCP 
in health-care settings (19,96,97). Exposures occur through percutaneous injury (e.g., a needlestick or cut with a sharp object), as well as through contact between potentially infectious blood, tissues, or other body fluids and mucous membranes of the 
eye, nose, mouth, or nonintact skin (e.g., exposed skin that is chapped, abraded, or shows signs of dermatitis).

Observational studies and surveys indicate that percutaneous injuries among general dentists and oral surgeons occur 
less frequently than among general and orthopedic surgeons and have decreased in frequency since the mid-1980s (98--102). This decline has been attributed to safer work practices, safer instrumentation or design, and continued DHCP education (103,104). Percutaneous injuries among DHCP usually 

1) occur outside the patient's mouth, thereby posing less risk 
for recontact with patient tissues; 2) involve limited amounts of blood; and 3) are caused by burs, syringe needles, 
laboratory knives, and other sharp instruments 
(99--102,105,106). Injuries among oral surgeons might occur more frequently 
during fracture reductions using wires 
(104,107). Experience, as measured by years in practice, does not appear to affect the risk 
of injury among general dentists or oral surgeons 
(100,104,107).

The majority of exposures in dentistry are preventable, and methods to reduce the risk of blood contacts have included use 
of standard precautions, use of devices with features engineered to prevent sharp injuries, and modifications of work 
practices. These approaches might have contributed to the decrease in percutaneous injuries among dentists during 
recent years (98--100,103). However, needlesticks and other blood contacts continue to occur, which is a concern because percutaneous injuries pose the greatest risk of transmission.

Standard precautions include use of PPE (e.g., gloves, masks, protective eyewear or face shield, and gowns) intended 

to prevent skin and mucous membrane exposures. Other protective equipment (e.g., finger guards while suturing) might also reduce injuries during dental procedures 
(104).

Engineering controls are the primary method to reduce 

exposures to blood and OPIM from sharp instruments and 
needles. These controls are frequently technology-based and often incorporate safer designs of instruments and devices (e.g., self-sheathing anesthetic needles and dental units designed to shield burs in handpieces) to reduce percutaneous 
injuries (101,103,108).

Work-practice controls establish practices to protect DHCP whose responsibilities include handling, using, assembling, 
or processing sharp devices (e.g., needles, scalers, laboratory utility knives, burs, explorers, and endodontic files) or sharps disposal containers. Work-practice controls can include removing burs before disassembling the handpiece from the dental 

unit, restricting use of fingers in tissue retraction or palpation during suturing and administration of anesthesia, and minimizing potentially uncontrolled movements of such instruments as scalers or laboratory knives 
(101,105).

As indicated, needles are a substantial source of percutaneous injury in dental practice, and engineering and work-practice controls for needle handling are of particular importance. In 2001, revisions to OSHA's bloodborne 
pathogens standard as mandated by the Needlestick Safety and Prevention Act of 2000 became effective. These revisions clarify the need for employers to consider safer needle devices as they become available and to involve employees directly responsible for patient care (e.g., dentists, hygienists, and dental 

assistants) in identifying and choosing such devices 
(109). Safer versions of sharp devices used in hospital settings have become available (e.g., blunt suture needles, phlebotomy devices, and butterfly needles), and their impact on reducing injuries has been documented 

(110--112). Aspirating anesthetic syringes that incorporate 
safety features have been developed for dental procedures, but the low injury rates in dentistry limit 
assessment of their effect on reducing injuries among DHCP.

Work-practice controls for needles and other sharps include placing used disposable syringes and needles, scalpel blades, and other sharp items in appropriate puncture-resistant containers located as close as feasible to where the items were 

used (2,7,13,113--115). In addition, used needles should never be recapped or otherwise manipulated by using both hands, or 
any other technique that involves directing the point of a needle toward any part of the body 
(2,7,13,97,113,114). A one-handed scoop technique, a mechanical device designed for holding the needle cap to facilitate one-handed recapping, or an engineered sharps injury protection device (e.g., needles with resheathing mechanisms) should be employed for recapping needles 
between uses and before disposal 
(2,7,13,113,114). DHCP should never bend or break needles before disposal because this 
practice requires unnecessary manipulation. Before attempting to remove needles from nondisposable aspirating syringes, 
DHCP should recap them to prevent injuries. For procedures involving multiple injections with a single needle, the practitioner 
should recap the needle between injections by using a one-handed technique or use a device with a needle-resheathing 
mechanism. Passing a syringe with an unsheathed needle should be avoided because of the potential for injury.

Additional information for developing a safety program and for identifying and evaluating safer dental devices is available at

http://www.cdc.gov/OralHealth/infectioncontrol/forms.htm (forms for screening and evaluating safer dental devices), and
http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/bbp (state legislation on needlestick safety).

Postexposure Management and Prophylaxis

Postexposure management is an integral component of a complete program to prevent infection after an occupational exposure to blood. During dental procedures, saliva is predictably contaminated with blood 
(7,114). Even when blood is not visible, it can still be present in limited quantities and therefore is considered a potentially infectious material by OSHA (13,19). A qualified health-care professional should evaluate any occupational exposure incident to blood or OPIM, 
including saliva, regardless of whether blood is visible, in dental settings 
(13).

Dental practices and laboratories should establish written, comprehensive programs that include hepatitis B vaccination 

and postexposure management protocols that 1) describe the types of contact with blood or OPIM that can place DHCP at risk for infection; 2) describe procedures for promptly reporting and evaluating such exposures; and 3) identify a 
health-care 

professional who is qualified to provide counseling and perform all medical evaluations and procedures in accordance 
with current recommendations of the U.S. Public Health Service (PHS), including PEP with chemotherapeutic drugs 
when indicated. DHCP, including students, who might reasonably be considered at risk for occupational exposure to blood or OPIM should be taught strategies to prevent contact with blood or OPIM and the principles of postexposure management, including PEP options, as part of their job orientation and training. Educational programs for DHCP and students should 
emphasize reporting all exposures to blood or OPIM as soon as possible, because certain interventions have to be initiated promptly to be effective. Policies should be consistent with the practices and procedures for worker protection required by OSHA and 
with current PHS recommendations for managing occupational exposures to blood 
(13,19).

After an occupational blood exposure, first aid should be administered as necessary. Puncture wounds and other injuries 
to the skin should be washed with soap and water; mucous 

membranes should be flushed with water. No evidence exists 
that using antiseptics for wound care or expressing fluid by squeezing the wound further reduces the risk of bloodborne 
pathogen transmission; however, use of antiseptics is not contraindicated. The application of caustic agents (e.g., bleach) or the injection of antiseptics or disinfectants into the wound is not recommended 
(19). Exposed DHCP should immediately report 
the exposure to the infection-control coordinator or other designated person, who should initiate referral to the qualified 
health-care professional and complete necessary 
reports. Because multiple factors contribute to the risk of 
infection after an occupational exposure to blood, the following information should be included in the exposure report, recorded in the exposed person's confidential medical record, and provided to the qualified health-care professional:

Date and time of exposure.
Details of the procedure being performed, including where and how the exposure occurred and whether the 

exposure involved a sharp device, the type and brand of device, and how and when during its handling the exposure occurred. Details of the exposure, including its severity and the type and amount of fluid or material. For a percutaneous 
injury, severity might be measured by the depth of the wound, gauge of the needle, and whether fluid was injected; for a skin or mucous membrane exposure, the estimated volume of material, duration of contact, and the condition of the skin 
(e.g., chapped, abraded, or intact) should be noted.
Details regarding whether the source material was known to contain HIV or other bloodborne pathogens, and, if 
the source was infected with HIV, the stage of disease, history of antiretroviral therapy, and viral load, if known.

Details regarding the exposed person (e.g., hepatitis B vaccination and vaccine-response status).
Details regarding counseling, postexposure management, and follow-up.

 Each occupational exposure should be evaluated individually for its potential to transmit HBV, HCV, and HIV, based on 
the following:

The type and amount of body substance involved.
The type of exposure (e.g., percutaneous injury, mucous membrane or nonintact skin exposure, or bites resulting in 
blood exposure to either person involved).

The infection status of the source.
The susceptibility of the exposed person 
(19).

 All of these factors should be considered in assessing the risk for infection and the need for further follow-up (e.g., PEP).

During 1990--1998, PHS published guidelines for PEP and other management of health-care worker exposures to 
HBV, HCV, or HIV (69,116--119). In 2001, these recommendations were updated and consolidated into one set of PHS 
guidelines (19). The new guidelines reflect the availability of new antiretroviral agents, new information regarding the use and safety of HIV PEP, and considerations regarding employing HIV PEP when resistance of the source patient's virus to 

antiretroviral agents is known or suspected. In addition, the 2001 guidelines provide guidance to clinicians and exposed HCP 
regarding when to consider HIV PEP and recommendations for PEP regimens 
(19).

Hand Hygiene

 Hand hygiene (e.g., handwashing, hand antisepsis, or surgical hand antisepsis) substantially reduces potential pathogens 
on the hands and is considered the single most critical measure for reducing the risk of transmitting organisms to 
patients and HCP (120--123). Hospital-based studies have demonstrated that noncompliance with hand hygiene practices is associated 
with health-care--associated infections and the spread of multiresistant organisms. Noncompliance also has been a major 
contributor 

to outbreaks (123). The prevalence of health-care--associated infections decreases as adherence of HCP to recommended 
hand hygiene measures improves (124--126).

The microbial flora of the skin, first described in 1938, consist of transient and resident microorganisms 
(127). Transient flora, which colonize the superficial layers of the skin, are easier to remove by routine handwashing. They are often acquired by HCP during direct contact with patients or contaminated environmental surfaces; these organisms are most 
frequently associated with health-care--associated infections. Resident flora attached to deeper layers of the skin are more resistant 
to removal and less likely to be associated with such infections.

The preferred method for hand hygiene depends on the type of procedure, the degree of contamination, and the 
desired persistence of antimicrobial action on the 
skin (Table 2). For routine dental examinations and nonsurgical 
procedures, handwashing and hand antisepsis is achieved by using either a plain or antimicrobial soap and water. If the hands are not 
visibly soiled, an alcohol-based hand rub is adequate.

The purpose of surgical hand antisepsis is to eliminate transient flora and reduce resident flora for the duration of 
a procedure to prevent introduction of organisms in the operative wound, if gloves become punctured or torn. Skin bacteria 
can rapidly multiply under surgical gloves if hands are washed with soap that is not antimicrobial 
(127,128). Thus, an antimicrobial soap or alcohol hand rub with persistent activity should be used before surgical procedures (129--131).

Agents used for surgical hand antisepsis should substantially reduce microorganisms on intact skin, contain a 

nonirritating antimicrobial preparation, have a broad spectrum of activity, be fast-acting, and have a persistent effect 
(121,132--135). Persistence (i.e., extended antimicrobial activity that prevents or inhibits survival of microorganisms after the product is applied) is critical because microorganisms can colonize on hands in the moist environment underneath gloves 
(122).

Alcohol hand rubs are rapidly germicidal when applied to the skin but should include such antiseptics as 

chlorhexidine, quaternary ammonium compounds, octenidine, or triclosan to achieve persistent activity 
(130). Factors that can influence the effectiveness of the surgical hand antisepsis in addition to the choice of antiseptic agent include duration and technique of scrubbing, as well as condition of the hands, and techniques used for drying and gloving. CDC's 2002 guideline on 
hand hygiene in health-care settings provides more complete information 
(123).

Selection of Antiseptic Agents

Selecting the most appropriate antiseptic agent for hand hygiene requires consideration of multiple factors. 
Essential performance characteristics of a product (e.g., the spectrum and persistence of activity and whether or not the agent is 
fast-acting) should be determined before selecting a product. 

Delivery system, cost per use, reliable vendor support and supply are also considerations. Because HCP acceptance is a 
major factor regarding compliance with recommended hand 
hygiene protocols (122,123,147,148), considering DHCP needs is critical and should include possible chemical allergies, skin integrity after repeated use, compatibility with lotions used, and offensive agent ingredients (e.g., scent). Discussing specific preparations or ingredients used for hand antisepsis is beyond the scope of this report. DHCP should choose from commercially available HCP handwashes when selecting agents for hand antisepsis or surgical hand antisepsis.

Storage and Dispensing of Hand Care Products

Handwashing products, including plain (i.e., nonantimicrobial) soap and antiseptic products, can become contaminated 
or support the growth of microorganisms 
(122). Liquid products should be stored in closed containers and dispensed from 
either disposable containers or containers that are washed and dried thoroughly before refilling. Soap should not be added to 
a partially empty dispenser, because this practice of topping off might lead to bacterial contamination 
(149,150). Store and dispense products according to manufacturers' directions.

Lotions

The primary defense against infection and transmission of pathogens is healthy, unbroken skin. Frequent handwashing with soaps and antiseptic agents can cause chronic irritant contact dermatitis among DHCP. Damage to the skin changes skin flora, resulting in more frequent colonization by staphylococci and gram-negative bacteria 

(151,152). The potential of detergents to cause skin irritation varies considerably, but can be reduced by adding emollients. Lotions are often recommended to ease the dryness resulting from frequent handwashing and to prevent dermatitis from glove use 
(153,154). However, petroleum-based lotion formulations can weaken latex gloves and increase permeability. For that reason, lotions that contain petroleum or 
other 

oil emollients should only be used at the end of the work day 

(122,155). Dental practitioners should obtain information 
from lotion manufacturers regarding interaction between lotions, gloves, dental materials, and antimicrobial products.

Fingernails and Artificial Nails

Although the relationship between fingernail length and wound infection is unknown, keeping nails short is considered 
key because the majority of flora on the hands are found under and around the fingernails 
(156). Fingernails should be short enough to allow DHCP to thoroughly clean underneath them and prevent glove tears 
(122). Sharp nail edges or broken nails are also likely to increase glove failure. Long artificial or natural nails can make donning gloves more difficult and can cause gloves to tear more readily. Hand carriage of gram-negative organisms has been determined to be greater among wearers 
of artificial nails than among nonwearers, both before and after handwashing 
(157--160). In addition, artificial fingernails 
or extenders have been epidemiologically implicated in multiple outbreaks involving fungal and bacterial infections in 
hospital intensive-care units and operating rooms 
(161--164). Freshly applied nail polish on natural nails does not 
increase the microbial load from periungual skin if fingernails are short; however, chipped nail polish can harbor added bacteria 
(165,166).

Jewelry

Studies have demonstrated that skin underneath rings is more heavily colonized than comparable areas of skin on 
fingers without rings (167--170). In a study of intensive-care nurses, multivariable analysis determined rings were the only 
substantial risk factor for carriage of gram-negative bacilli and 

Staphylococcus aureus, and the concentration of organisms correlated 
with the number of rings worn (170). However, two other studies demonstrated that mean bacterial colony counts on hands 
after handwashing were similar among persons wearing rings and those not wearing rings 
(169,171). Whether wearing rings increases the likelihood of transmitting a pathogen is unknown; further studies are needed to establish whether rings result in higher transmission of pathogens in health-care settings. However, rings and decorative nail jewelry can make donning 
gloves more difficult and cause gloves to tear more readily 

(142,143). Thus, jewelry should not interfere with glove use (e.g., impair ability to wear the correct-sized glove or alter glove integrity). 
Personal Protective Equipment

 PPE is designed to protect the skin and the mucous membranes of the eyes, nose, and mouth of DHCP from exposure to blood or OPIM. Use of rotary dental and surgical instruments (e.g., handpieces or ultrasonic scalers) and 
air-water syringes creates a visible spray that contains primarily large-particle droplets of water, saliva, blood, microorganisms, and other debris. This spatter travels only a short distance and settles out quickly, landing on the floor, nearby operatory surfaces, DHCP, or the patient. The spray also might contain certain aerosols (i.e., particles of respirable size, <10 µm). Aerosols can remain airborne for extended periods and can be inhaled. However, they should not be confused with the large-particle spatter 

that makes up the bulk of the spray from handpieces and ultrasonic scalers. Appropriate work practices, including use of dental dams (172) and high-velocity air evacuation, should minimize dissemination of droplets, spatter, and aerosols (2).

Primary PPE used in oral health-care settings includes gloves, surgical masks, protective eyewear, face shields, and protective clothing (e.g., gowns and jackets). All PPE should be removed before DHCP leave patient-care areas 

(13). Reusable PPE (e.g., clinician or patient protective eyewear and face shields) should be cleaned with soap and water, and when visibly soiled, disinfected between patients, according to the manufacturer's 
directions (2,13). Wearing gloves, surgical masks, 
protective eyewear, and protective clothing in specified circumstances to reduce the risk of exposures to bloodborne pathogens 

is mandated by OSHA (13). General work clothes (e.g., uniforms, scrubs, pants, and shirts) are neither intended to protect against a hazard nor considered PPE.

Masks, Protective Eyewear, Face Shields

A surgical mask that covers both the nose and mouth and protective eyewear with solid side shields or a face shield should 
be worn by DHCP during procedures and patient-care activities likely to generate splashes or sprays of blood or body 
fluids. Protective eyewear for patients shields their eyes from spatter or debris generated during dental procedures. A surgical mask protects against microorganisms generated by the wearer, with >95% bacterial filtration efficiency, and also protects DHCP from large-particle droplet spatter that might contain bloodborne pathogens or other infectious microorganisms 
(173). The mask's outer surface can become contaminated with infectious droplets from spray of oral fluids or from touching the mask 

with contaminated fingers. Also, when a mask becomes wet from exhaled moist air, the resistance to airflow through the 

mask increases, causing more airflow to pass around edges of the mask. If the mask becomes wet, it should be changed between patients or even during patient treatment, when possible 
(2,174).

When airborne infection isolation precautions (expanded or transmission-based) are necessary (e.g., for TB patients), a National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH)-certified particulate-filter respirator (e.g., N95, N99, 
or N100) should be used (20). N95 refers to the ability to filter 1-µm particles in the unloaded state with a filter efficiency of >95% (i.e., filter leakage <5%), given flow rates of 

<50 L/min (i.e., approximate maximum airflow rate of HCP 
during breathing). Available data indicate infectious droplet nuclei measure 1--5 µm; therefore, respirators used in health-care settings should be able to efficiently filter the smallest particles in this range.

The majority of surgical masks are not NIOSH-certified as respirators, do not protect the user adequately from exposure 
to TB, and do not satisfy OSHA requirements for respiratory protection 
(174,175). However, certain surgical masks (i.e., 
surgical N95 respirator) do meet the requirements and are certified by NIOSH as respirators. The level of protection a 
respirator provides is determined by the efficiency of the filter material for incoming air and how well the face piece fits or seals to the face (e.g., qualitatively or quantitatively tested in a reliable way to obtain a face-seal leakage of <10% and to fit the different facial sizes and characteristics of HCP).

When respirators are used while treating patients with diseases requiring airborne-transmission precautions (e.g., TB), 
they should be used in the context of a complete respiratory protection program 
(175). This program should include training and 
fit testing to ensure an adequate seal between the edges of the respirator and the wearer's face. Detailed information 
regarding respirator programs, including fit-test procedures are available at 
 http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/99-143.html 
(174,176).

Protective Clothing

Protective clothing and equipment (e.g., gowns, lab coats, gloves, masks, and protective eyewear or face shield) should 

be worn to prevent contamination of street clothing and to protect the skin of DHCP from exposures to blood and 
body substances (2,7,10,11,13,137). OSHA bloodborne pathogens standard requires sleeves to be long enough to protect 
the forearms when the gown is worn as PPE (i.e., when spatter and spray of blood, saliva, or OPIM to the forearms is 
anticipated) (13,14). DHCP should change protective clothing when it becomes visibly soiled and as soon as feasible if penetrated by blood or other potentially infectious fluids 
(2,13,14,137). All protective clothing should be removed before leaving the work 
area (13).

Gloves and Gloving

DHCP wear gloves to prevent contamination of their hands when touching mucous membranes, blood, saliva, or 
OPIM, and also to reduce the likelihood that microorganisms present on the hands of DHCP will be transmitted to patients 
during surgical or other patient-care procedures 
(1,2,7,10). Medical gloves, both patient examination and surgeon's gloves, 
are manufactured as single-use disposable items that should be used for only one patient, then discarded. Gloves should be 
changed between patients and when torn or punctured.

Wearing gloves does not eliminate the need for handwashing. Hand hygiene should be performed immediately 

before donning gloves. Gloves can have small, unapparent defects or can be torn during use, and hands can become contaminated during glove removal 
(122,177--187). These circumstances increase the risk of operative wound contamination and exposure 

of the DHCP's hands to microorganisms from patients. In addition, bacteria can multiply rapidly in the moist 
environments underneath gloves, and thus, the hands should be dried thoroughly before donning gloves and washed again immediately after glove removal.

Types of Gloves

Because gloves are task-specific, their selection should be based on the type of procedure to be performed (e.g., surgery 

or patient examination) (Table 3). Sterile surgeon's gloves must meet standards for sterility assurance established by FDA and 
are less likely than patient examination gloves to harbor pathogens that could contaminate an operative wound (188). Appropriate gloves in the correct size should be readily accessible 
(13).

Glove Integrity

Limited studies of the penetrability of different glove materials under conditions of use have been conducted in the dental environment. Consistent with observations in clinical medicine, leakage rates vary by glove material (e.g., latex, vinyl, and nitrile), duration of use, and type of procedure performed 
(182,184,186,189--191), as well as by manufacturer 

(192--194). The frequency of perforations in surgeon's gloves used during outpatient oral surgical procedures has been determined to range from 6% to 16% (181,185,195,196).

Studies have demonstrated that HCP and DHCP are frequently unaware of minute tears in gloves that occur during 
use (186,190,191,197). These studies determined that gloves developed defects in 30 minutes--3 hours, depending on type of 
glove and procedure. Investigators did not determine an optimal time for changing gloves during procedures.

During dental procedures, patient examination and surgeon's gloves commonly contact multiple types of chemicals 
and materials (e.g., disinfectants and antiseptics, composite resins, and bonding agents) that can compromise the integrity of latex as well as vinyl, nitrile, and other synthetic glove materials 
(198--206). In addition, latex gloves can interfere with 

the setting of vinyl polysiloxane impression materials 
(207--209), although the setting is apparently not adversely affected 
by synthetic vinyl gloves (207,208). Given the diverse selection of dental materials on the market, dental practitioners 
should consult glove manufacturers regarding the chemical compatibility of glove materials.

If the integrity of a glove is compromised (e.g., punctured), it should be changed as soon as possible 
(13,210,211). Washing latex gloves with plain soap, chlorhexidine, or alcohol can lead to the formation of glove micropunctures (177,212,213) and subsequent hand contamination 
(138). Because this condition, known as wicking, can allow penetration of liquids 
through undetected holes, washing gloves is not recommended. After a hand rub with alcohol, the hands should be thoroughly 

dried before gloving, because hands still wet with an alcohol-based hand hygiene product can increase the risk of glove perforation (192).

FDA regulates the medical glove industry, which includes gloves marketed as sterile surgeon's and sterile or nonsterile patient examination gloves. General-purpose utility gloves are also used in dental health-care settings but are not regulated by FDA because they are not promoted for medical use. More rigorous standards are applied to surgeon's than to examination 
gloves. FDA has identified acceptable quality levels (e.g., maximum defects allowed) for glove manufacturers 

(214), but even intact gloves eventually fail with exposure to mechanical (e.g., sharps, fingernails, or jewelry) and chemical (e.g., dimethyacrylates) hazards and over time. These variables can be controlled, ultimately optimizing glove performance, by 
1) maintaining short fingernails, 2) minimizing or eliminating hand jewelry, and 3) using engineering and work-practice controls to avoid injuries with sharps.

Sterile Surgeon's Gloves and Double-Gloving During Oral Surgical Procedures

Certain limited studies have determined no difference in postoperative infection rates after routine tooth extractions 
when surgeons wore either sterile or nonsterile gloves 
(215,216). However, wearing sterile surgeon's gloves during surgical 
procedures is supported by a strong theoretical rationale 
(2,7,137). Sterile gloves minimize transmission of microorganisms from the 
hands of surgical DHCP to patients and prevent contamination of the hands of surgical DHCP with the patient's blood and 
body fluids (137). In addition, sterile surgeon's gloves are more rigorously regulated by FDA and therefore might provide 
an increased level of protection for the provider if exposure to blood is likely.

Although the effectiveness of wearing two pairs of gloves in preventing disease transmission has not been demonstrated, 

the majority of studies among HCP and DHCP have demonstrated a lower frequency of inner glove perforation and visible blood on the surgeon's hands when double gloves are worn 
(181,185,195,196,198,217--219). In one study evaluating double 
gloves during oral surgical and dental hygiene procedures, the perforation of outer latex gloves was greater during longer procedures (i.e., >45 minutes), with the highest rate (10%) of perforation occurring during oral surgery procedures (196). Based on these studies, double gloving might provide additional protection from occupational blood contact (220). Double gloving does not appear to substantially reduce either manual dexterity or tactile sensitivity (221--223). Additional protection might also 
be provided by specialty products (e.g., orthopedic surgical gloves and glove liners) 
(224).

Contact Dermatitis and Latex Hypersensitivity

 Occupationally related contact dermatitis can develop from frequent and repeated use of hand hygiene products, exposure to chemicals, and glove use. Contact dermatitis is classified as either irritant or allergic. Irritant contact dermatitis is 
common, nonallergic, and develops as dry, itchy, irritated areas on the skin around the area of contact. By comparison, allergic contact dermatitis (type IV hypersensitivity) can result from exposure to accelerators and other chemicals used in the manufacture of rubber gloves (e.g., natural rubber latex, nitrile, and neoprene), as well as from other chemicals found in the dental 
practice setting (e.g., methacrylates and glutaraldehyde). 
Allergic contact dermatitis often manifests as a rash beginning hours 
after contact and, similar to irritant dermatitis, is usually confined to the area of contact.

Latex allergy (type I hypersensitivity to latex proteins) can be a more serious systemic allergic reaction, usually 

beginning within minutes of exposure but sometimes occurring hours later and producing varied symptoms. More common reactions include runny nose, sneezing, itchy eyes, scratchy throat, hives, and itchy burning skin sensations. More severe 
symptoms include asthma marked by difficult breathing, coughing spells, and wheezing; cardiovascular and gastrointestinal ailments; 
and in rare cases, anaphylaxis and death 
(32,225). The American Dental Association (ADA) began investigating the prevalence 
of type I latex hypersensitivity among DHCP at the ADA annual meeting in 1994. In 1994 and 1995, 
approximately 2,000 dentists, hygienists, and assistants volunteered for skin-prick testing. Data demonstrated that 6.2% of those tested were positive for type I latex hypersensitivity 
(226). Data from the subsequent 5 years of this ongoing cross-sectional study indicated 
a decline in prevalence from 8.5% to 4.3% 
(227). This downward trend is similar to that reported by other studies and might 
be related to use of latex gloves with lower allergen content 
(228--230).

Natural rubber latex proteins responsible for latex allergy are attached to glove powder. When powdered latex gloves 

are worn, more latex protein reaches the skin. In addition, when powdered latex gloves are donned or removed, latex 
protein/powder particles become aerosolized and can be inhaled, contacting mucous membranes 
(231). As a result, allergic patients and DHCP can experience cutaneous, respiratory, and conjunctival symptoms related to latex protein exposure. DHCP can become sensitized to latex protein with repeated exposure 
(232--236). Work areas where only powder-free, low-allergen latex gloves 

are used demonstrate low or undetectable amounts of latex allergy-causing proteins (237--239) and fewer symptoms among HCP related to natural rubber latex allergy. Because of the role of glove powder in exposure to latex protein, NIOSH 
recommends that if latex gloves are chosen, HCP should be provided with reduced protein, powder-free gloves (32). Nonlatex (e.g., nitrile or vinyl) powder-free and low-protein gloves are also available (31,240). Although rare, potentially life-threatening 

anaphylactic reactions to latex can occur; dental practices should be appropriately equipped and have procedures in place to respond to 
such emergencies.

DHCP and dental patients with latex allergy should not have direct contact with latex-containing materials and should be 
in a latex-safe environment with all latex-containing products removed from their vicinity 
(31). Dental patients with histories of latex allergy can be at risk from dental products (e.g., prophylaxis cups, rubber dams, orthodontic elastics, and medication vials) (241). Any latex-containing devices that cannot be removed from the treatment environment should 
be adequately covered or isolated. Persons might also be allergic to chemicals used in the manufacture of natural rubber latex 

and synthetic rubber gloves as well as metals, plastics, or other materials used in dental care. Taking thorough health histories for both patients and DHCP, followed by avoidance of contact with potential allergens can minimize the possibility of 
adverse reactions. Certain common predisposing conditions for latex allergy include previous history of allergies, a history of spina bifida, urogenital anomalies, or allergies to avocados, kiwis, nuts, or bananas. The following precautions should be considered to ensure safe treatment for patients who have possible or documented latex allergy:

Be aware that latent allergens in the ambient air can cause respiratory or anaphylactic symptoms among persons with latex hypersensitivity. Patients with latex allergy can be scheduled for the first appointment of the day to minimize 
their inadvertent exposure to airborne latex particles.
Communicate with other DHCP regarding patients with latex allergy (e.g., by oral instructions, written protocols, and posted signage) to prevent them from bringing latex-containing materials into the treatment area.
Frequently clean all working areas contaminated with 
latex powder or dust.
Have emergency treatment kits with latex-free products available at all times.
If latex-related complications occur during or after a procedure, manage the reaction and seek emergency assistance as indicated. Follow current medical emergency response recommendations for management of anaphylaxis 
(32).

Sterilization and Disinfection of Patient-Care Items

 Patient-care items (dental instruments, devices, and equipment) are categorized as critical, semicritical, or 
noncritical, depending on the potential risk for infection associated with their intended use 
(Table 4) (242). Critical items used to 
penetrate soft tissue or bone have the greatest risk of transmitting infection and should be sterilized by heat. Semicritical items touch mucous membranes or nonintact skin and have a lower risk of transmission; because the majority of semicritical items 

in dentistry are heat-tolerant, they also should be sterilized by using heat. If a semicritical item is heat-sensitive, it should, at a minimum, be processed with high-level disinfection 
(2).

Noncritical patient-care items pose the least risk of transmission of infection, contacting only intact skin, which can serve 

as an effective barrier to microorganisms. In the majority of cases, cleaning, or if visibly soiled, cleaning followed by disinfection with an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant is adequate. When the item is visibly contaminated with blood or OPIM, an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant with a tuberculocidal claim (i.e., intermediate-level disinfectant) should be used 
(2,243,244). Cleaning or disinfection of certain noncritical patient-care items can be difficult or damage the surfaces; therefore, use of disposable barrier protection of these surfaces might be a preferred alternative.

FDA-cleared sterilant/high-level disinfectants and 
EPA-registered disinfectants must have clear label claims for intended 

use, and manufacturer instructions for use must be followed (245). A more complete description of the regulatory framework in 
the United States by which liquid chemical germicides are evaluated and regulated is included (Appendix A).

Three levels of disinfection, high, intermediate, and low, are used for patient-care devices that do not require sterility and two levels, intermediate and low, for environmental surfaces 

(242). The intended use of the patient-care item should determine 
the recommended level of disinfection. Dental practices should follow the product manufacturer's directions regarding concentrations and exposure time for disinfectant activity relative to the surface to be disinfected (245). A summary of sterilization and disinfection methods is included (Appendix C).

Transporting and Processing Contaminated Critical and Semicritical Patient-Care Items

DHCP can be exposed to microorganisms on contaminated instruments and devices through percutaneous injury, contact with nonintact skin on the hands, or contact with mucous membranes of the eyes, nose, or mouth. 
Contaminated instruments should be handled carefully to prevent exposure to sharp instruments that can cause a percutaneous injury. Instruments should be placed in an appropriate container at the point of use to prevent percutaneous injuries during transport to the instrument processing area 
(13).

Instrument processing requires multiple steps to achieve sterilization or high-level disinfection. Sterilization is a complex process requiring specialized equipment, adequate space, qualified DHCP who are provided with ongoing training, and regular monitoring for quality assurance 
(247). Correct cleaning, packaging, sterilizer loading procedures, sterilization methods, 
or high-level disinfection methods should be followed to 
ensure that an instrument is adequately processed and safe for reuse 
on patients.

Instrument Processing Area

DHCP should process all instruments in a designated central processing area to more easily control quality and ensure 
safety (248). The central processing area should be divided into sections for 1) receiving, cleaning, and decontamination; 2) preparation and packaging; 3) sterilization; and 4) storage. Ideally, walls or partitions should separate the sections to control traffic flow and contain contaminants generated during processing. When physical separation of these sections cannot 

be achieved, adequate spatial separation might be satisfactory if the DHCP who process instruments are trained in work 
practices to prevent contamination of clean areas 
(248). Space should be adequate for the volume of work anticipated and the items 
to be stored (248).

Receiving, Cleaning, and Decontamination

Reusable instruments, supplies, and equipment should be received, sorted, cleaned, and decontaminated in one section of 
the processing area. Cleaning should precede all disinfection and sterilization processes; it should involve removal of debris as well as organic and inorganic contamination. Removal of debris and contamination is achieved either by scrubbing with a 
surfactant, detergent, and water, or by an automated process (e.g., ultrasonic cleaner or washer-disinfector) using chemical agents. If visible debris, whether inorganic or organic matter, is not removed, it will interfere with microbial inactivation and can compromise the 

disinfection or sterilization process 
(244,249--252). After cleaning, instruments should be rinsed with water to remove 

chemical or detergent residue. Splashing should be minimized during cleaning and rinsing 
(13). Before final disinfection or 
sterilization, instruments should be handled as though contaminated.

Considerations in selecting cleaning methods and equipment include 1) efficacy of the method, process, and 
equipment; 2) compatibility with items to be cleaned; and 3) occupational health and exposure risks. Use of automated cleaning equipment (e.g., ultrasonic cleaner or washer-disinfector) does not require presoaking or scrubbing of instruments and 

can increase productivity, improve cleaning effectiveness, and 
decrease worker exposure to blood and body fluids. 
Thus, using automated equipment can be safer and more efficient than manually cleaning contaminated instruments (253).

If manual cleaning is not performed immediately, placing instruments in a puncture-resistant container and soaking them with detergent, a disinfectant/detergent, or an enzymatic cleaner will prevent drying of patient material and make 
cleaning easier and less time-consuming. Use of a liquid chemical sterilant/high-level disinfectant (e.g., glutaraldehyde) as a holding solution is not recommended (244). Using work-practice controls (e.g., long-handled brush) to keep the scrubbing hand away from sharp instruments is recommended 
(14). To avoid injury from sharp instruments, DHCP should wear 
puncture-resistant, heavy-duty utility gloves when handling or manually cleaning contaminated instruments and devices 

(6). Employees should not reach into trays or containers holding sharp instruments that cannot be seen (e.g., sinks filled with soapy water in which sharp instruments have been placed). Work-practice controls should include use of a strainer-type basket to hold 
instruments and forceps to remove the items. Because splashing is likely to occur, a mask, protective eyewear or face shield, and gown 
or jacket should be worn (13).

Preparation and Packaging

In another section of the processing area, cleaned instruments and other dental supplies should be inspected, assembled 

into sets or trays, and wrapped, packaged, or placed into container systems for sterilization. Hinged instruments should be processed open and unlocked. An internal chemical indicator should be placed in every package. In addition, an external chemical indicator (e.g., chemical indicator tape) should be used when the internal indicator cannot be seen from outside the 
package. For unwrapped loads, at a minimum, an internal chemical indicator should be placed in the tray or cassette with items to be sterilized (254) (see Sterilization of Unwrapped Instruments). Dental practices should refer to the manufacturer's instructions regarding use and correct placement of chemical indicators (see Sterilization Monitoring). Critical and semicritical 
instruments that will be stored should be wrapped or placed in containers (e.g., cassettes or organizing trays) designed to maintain sterility during storage (2,247,255--257).

Packaging materials (e.g., wraps or container systems) allow penetration of the sterilization agent and maintain sterility of 
the processed item after sterilization. Materials for maintaining sterility of instruments during transport and 
storage include wrapped perforated instrument cassettes, peel pouches of plastic or paper, and sterilization wraps (i.e., woven 
and nonwoven). Packaging materials should be designed for the type of sterilization process being used 
(256--259).

Sterilization

The sterilization section of the processing area should 

include the sterilizers and related supplies, with adequate space for loading, unloading, and cool down. The area can also 
include incubators for analyzing spore tests and enclosed storage for sterile items and disposable (single-use) items 
(260). Manufacturer and local building code specifications will determine placement and room ventilation requirements. 

Sterilization Procedures. Heat-tolerant dental instruments usually are sterilized by 1) steam under pressure (autoclaving), 2) dry heat, or 3) unsaturated chemical vapor. All sterilization should be performed by using medical sterilization 

equipment cleared by FDA. The sterilization times, temperatures, and other operating parameters recommended by the manufacturer of the equipment used, as well as instructions for correct use of containers, wraps, and chemical or biological indicators, should always be followed (243,247).

Items to be sterilized should be arranged to permit free circulation of the sterilizing agent (e.g., steam, chemical vapor, or dry heat); manufacturer's instructions for loading the sterilizer should be followed 
(248,260). Instrument packs should be 
allowed to dry inside the sterilizer chamber before removing and handling. Packs should not be touched until they are cool and dry because hot packs act as wicks, absorbing moisture, and hence, bacteria from hands 

(247). The ability of equipment to attain physical parameters required to achieve sterilization should be monitored by mechanical, chemical, and biological indicators. Sterilizers vary in their types of indicators 
and their ability to provide readings on the mechanical or physical parameters of 
the 

sterilization process (e.g., time, temperature, and pressure). Consult with the sterilizer manufacturer regarding selection and 

use of indicators.

Steam Sterilization. Among sterilization methods, steam sterilization, which is dependable and economical, is the most widely used for wrapped and unwrapped critical and semicritical items that are not sensitive to heat and moisture 
(260). Steam sterilization requires exposure of each item to direct steam contact at a required temperature and pressure for a specified time needed to kill microorganisms. Two basic types of steam sterilizers are the gravity displacement and the high-speed 
prevacuum sterilizer.

The majority of tabletop sterilizers used in a dental practice are gravity displacement sterilizers, although 
prevacuum sterilizers are becoming more widely available. In gravity displacement sterilizers, steam is admitted through steam lines, 

a steam generator, or self-generation of steam within the chamber. Unsaturated air is forced out of the chamber through a vent in the chamber wall. Trapping of air is a concern when using saturated steam under gravity displacement; errors in 
packaging items or overloading the sterilizer chamber can result in cool air pockets and items not being sterilized. 
Prevacuum sterilizers are fitted with a pump to create a vacuum in the chamber and ensure air removal from the 
sterilizing chamber before the chamber is pressurized with steam. Relative to gravity displacement, this procedure allows faster and more positive steam penetration throughout the entire load. Prevacuum sterilizers should be tested periodically for adequate 
air removal, as recommended by the manufacturer. Air not removed from the chamber will interfere with steam contact. If 
a sterilizer fails the air removal test, it should not be used until inspected by sterilizer maintenance personnel and it passes the test (243,247). Manufacturer's instructions, with specific details regarding operation and user maintenance 
information, should be followed.

Unsaturated Chemical-Vapor Sterilization. Unsaturated chemical-vapor sterilization involves heating a chemical 
solution of primarily alcohol with 0.23% formaldehyde in a closed pressurized chamber. Unsaturated chemical vapor sterilization 

of carbon steel instruments (e.g., dental burs) causes less corrosion than steam sterilization because of the low level of water present during the cycle. Instruments should be dry 
before sterilizing. State and local authorities should be consulted 

for hazardous waste disposal requirements for the sterilizing solution.

Dry-Heat Sterilization. Dry heat is used to sterilize materials that might be damaged by moist heat (e.g., burs and certain orthodontic instruments). Although dry heat has the advantages of low operating cost and being noncorrosive, it is a prolonged process and the high temperatures required are not suitable for certain patient-care items and devices (261).

Dry-heat sterilizers used in dentistry include static-air and forced-air types.

The static-air type is commonly called an oven-type sterilizer. Heating coils in the bottom or sides of the unit cause hot air to 
rise inside the chamber through natural convection.
The forced-air type is also known as a rapid heat-transfer sterilizer. Heated air is circulated throughout the chamber at 
a high velocity, permitting more rapid transfer of 
energy from the air to the instruments, thereby reducing the time 
needed for sterilization.

 Sterilization of Unwrapped Instruments. An unwrapped cycle (sometimes called 
flash sterilization) is a method for sterilizing unwrapped patient-care items for immediate use. The time required for unwrapped sterilization cycles depends 
on the type of sterilizer and the type of item (i.e., porous or nonporous) to be sterilized 
(243). The unwrapped cycle in tabletop sterilizers is preprogrammed by the manufacturer to a specific time and temperature setting and can include a drying phase at the end to produce a dry instrument with much of the heat dissipated. If the drying phase requirements are 
unclear, the operation manual or manufacturer of the sterilizer should be consulted. If the unwrapped sterilization cycle in a steam 

sterilizer does not include a drying phase, or has only a minimal drying phase, items retrieved from the sterilizer will be hot and wet, making aseptic transport to the point of use more difficult. For dry-heat and chemical-vapor sterilizers, a drying phase is not required.

Unwrapped sterilization should be used only under certain conditions: 1) thorough cleaning and drying of 

instruments precedes the unwrapped sterilization cycle; 2) mechanical monitors are checked and chemical indicators used for each cycle; 3) care is taken to avoid thermal injury to DHCP or patients; and 4) items are transported aseptically to the point of use 
to maintain sterility (134,258,262). Because all implantable devices should be quarantined after sterilization until the results of biological monitoring are known, unwrapped or flash sterilization of implantable items is not recommended 
(134).

Critical instruments sterilized unwrapped should be transferred immediately by using aseptic technique, from the sterilizer 
to the actual point of use. Critical instruments should not be stored unwrapped 
(260). Semicritical instruments that are 
sterilized 

unwrapped on a tray or in a container system should be used immediately or within a short time. When sterile items are 

open to the air, they will eventually become contaminated. Storage, even temporary, of unwrapped semicritical instruments is discouraged because it permits exposure to dust, airborne organisms, and other unnecessary contamination before use on a patient (260). A carefully written protocol for minimizing the risk of contaminating unwrapped instruments should be prepared and followed (260).

Other Sterilization Methods. Heat-sensitive critical and semicritical instruments and devices can be sterilized 
by immersing them in liquid chemical germicides registered by FDA as sterilants. When using a liquid chemical germicide 

for sterilization, certain poststerilization procedures are essential. Items need to be 1) rinsed with sterile water after removal to remove toxic or irritating residues; 2) handled using sterile gloves and dried with sterile towels; and 3) delivered to the point of use in an aseptic manner. If stored before use, the instrument should not be considered sterile and should be sterilized again just before use. In addition, the sterilization process with liquid chemical sterilants cannot be verified with biological indicators (263).

Because of these limitations and because liquid chemical sterilants can require approximately 12 hours of 
complete immersion, they are almost never used to sterilize instruments. Rather, these chemicals are more often used for 

high-level disinfection (249). Shorter immersion times (12--90 minutes) are used to achieve high-level disinfection of semicritical instruments or items. These powerful, sporicidal chemicals (e.g., glutaraldehyde, peracetic acid, and hydrogen peroxide) are highly toxic (244,264,265). Manufacturer instructions (e.g., regarding dilution, immersion time, and temperature) and safety precautions for using chemical sterilants/high-level disinfectants must be followed precisely 
(15,245). These chemicals should not be used for applications other than those indicated in their label instructions. Misapplications include use as an environmental surface disinfectant or instrument-holding 
solution.

When using appropriate precautions (e.g., closed containers to limit vapor release, chemically resistant gloves and 

aprons, goggles, and face shields), glutaraldehyde-based products can be used without tissue irritation or adverse health effects. However, dermatologic, eye irritation, respiratory effects, and skin sensitization have been reported (266--268). Because of their lack of chemical resistance to glutaraldehydes, medical gloves are not an effective barrier (200,269,270). Other factors might apply (e.g., room exhaust ventilation or 10 air exchanges/hour) to ensure DHCP safety 
(266,271). For all of these reasons, using heat-sensitive semicritical items that must be processed with liquid chemical germicides is discouraged; heat-tolerant or disposable alternatives are available for the majority of such items.

Low-temperature sterilization with ethylene oxide gas (ETO) has been used extensively in larger health-care facilities. 

Its primary advantage is the ability to sterilize heat- and moisture-sensitive patient-care items with reduced deleterious effects. However, extended sterilization times of 10--48 hours and potential hazards to patients and DHCP requiring stringent health and safety requirements (272--274) make this method impractical for private-practice settings. Handpieces cannot be effectively sterilized with this method because of decreased penetration of ETO gas flow through a small lumen 
(250,275). Other types of low-temperature sterilization (e.g., hydrogen peroxide gas plasma) exist but are not yet practical for dental offices.

Bead sterilizers have been used in dentistry to sterilize small metallic instruments (e.g., endodontic files). FDA 
has determined that a risk of infection exists with these devices because of their potential failure to sterilize dental instruments and has required their commercial distribution cease unless the manufacturer files a premarket approval application. If a 
bead sterilizer is employed, DHCP assume the risk of employing a dental 
device FDA has deemed neither safe nor effective 
(276).

Sterilization Monitoring. Monitoring of sterilization procedures should include a combination of process 
parameters, including mechanical, chemical, and biological 

(247,248,277). These parameters evaluate both the sterilizing conditions 
and the procedure's effectiveness.

Mechanical techniques for monitoring sterilization include assessing cycle time, temperature, and pressure by observing 
the gauges or displays on the sterilizer and noting these 
parameters for each load (243,248). Some tabletop sterilizers 
have recording devices that print out these parameters. Correct readings do not ensure sterilization, but incorrect readings can be 
the first indication of a problem with the sterilization cycle.

Chemical indicators, internal and external, use sensitive chemicals to assess physical conditions (e.g., time and 
temperature) during the sterilization process. Although chemical indicators do not prove sterilization has been achieved, they allow detection of certain equipment malfunctions, and they can help identify procedural errors. External indicators applied to the outside of a package (e.g., chemical indicator tape or special markings) change color rapidly when a specific parameter is reached, and 
they 

verify that the package has been exposed to the sterilization process. Internal chemical indicators should be used inside 
each package to ensure the sterilizing agent has penetrated the packaging material and actually reached the instruments inside. 
A single-parameter internal chemical indicator provides information regarding only one sterilization parameter (e.g., time 
or temperature). Multiparameter internal chemical indicators are designed to react to 
>2 parameters (e.g., time and 
temperature; or time, temperature, and the presence of steam) and can provide a more reliable indication that sterilization conditions have been met (254). Multiparameter internal indicators are available only for steam sterilizers (i.e., autoclaves).

Because chemical indicator test results are received when the sterilization cycle is complete, they can provide an 
early indication of a problem and where in the process the problem might exist. If either mechanical indicators or internal or external chemical indicators indicate inadequate processing, items in the load should not be used until reprocessed (134).

Biological indicators (BIs) (i.e., spore tests) are the most 

accepted method for monitoring the sterilization process 
(278,279) because they assess it directly by killing known highly resistant microorganisms (e.g., Geobacillus or Bacillus species), rather 

than merely testing the physical and chemical conditions necessary for sterilization 
(243). Because spores used in BIs are more resistant and present in greater numbers than the common microbial contaminants found on patient-care equipment, an inactivated BI indicates other potential pathogens in the load have been killed 
(280).

Correct functioning of sterilization cycles should be verified for each sterilizer by the periodic use (at least weekly) of 

BIs (2,9,134,243,278,279). Every load containing implantable devices should be monitored with such indicators 
(248), and the items quarantined until BI results are known. However, in an emergency, placing implantable items in quarantine until spore tests are known to be negative might be impossible.

Manufacturer's directions should determine the placement and location of BI in the sterilizer. A control BI, from the same 

lot as the test indicator and not processed through the sterilizer, should be incubated with the test BI; the control BI should yield positive results for bacterial growth.

In-office biological monitoring is available; mail-in sterilization monitoring services (e.g., from private companies or dental schools) can also be used to test both the BI and the control. Although some DHCP have expressed concern that delays caused by mailing specimens might cause 
false-negatives, studies have determined that mail delays have no substantial effect on 
final test results (281,282).

Procedures to follow in the event of a positive spore test have been developed 
(243,247). If the mechanical (e.g., time, temperature, and pressure) and chemical (i.e., internal or 
external) indicators demonstrate that the sterilizer is 

functioning correctly, a single positive spore test probably does not indicate sterilizer malfunction. Items other than implantable devices do not necessarily need to be recalled; however the spore test should be repeated immediately after correctly loading the 
sterilizer and using the same cycle that produced the failure. The sterilizer should be removed from service, and all records reviewed 
of chemical and mechanical monitoring since the last negative BI test. Also, sterilizer operating procedures should be 

reviewed, including packaging, loading, and spore testing, with all persons who work with the sterilizer to determine whether 
operator error could be responsible 
(9,243,247). Overloading, failure to provide adequate package separation, and incorrect or 
excessive packaging material are all common reasons for a positive BI in the absence of mechanical failure of the sterilizer unit (260). A second monitored sterilizer in the office can be used, or a loaner from a sales or repair company obtained, to minimize office disruption while waiting for the repeat BI.

If the repeat test is negative and chemical and mechanical monitoring indicate adequate processing, the sterilizer can be 

put back into service. If the repeat BI test is positive, and packaging, loading, and operating procedures have been confirmed 
as performing correctly, the sterilizer should remain out of service until it has been inspected, repaired, and rechallenged with BI tests in three consecutive empty chamber sterilization cycles 

(9,243). When possible, items from suspect loads dating back 
to the last negative BI should be recalled, rewrapped, and resterilized 
(9,283).

A more conservative approach has been recommended 
(247) in which any positive spore test is assumed to represent 
sterilizer malfunction and requires that all materials processed in that sterilizer, dating from the sterilization cycle having the last negative biologic indicator to the next cycle indicating satisfactory biologic indicator results, should be considered nonsterile 

and retrieved, if possible, and reprocessed or held in quarantine until the results of the repeat BI are known. This approach 
is considered conservative because the margin of safety in steam sterilization is sufficient enough that infection risk, 
associated with items in a load indicating spore growth, is minimal, particularly if the item was properly cleaned and the temperature 
was achieved (e.g., as demonstrated by acceptable chemical indicator or temperature chart) 
(243). Published studies are not available that document disease transmission through a nonretrieved surgical instrument after a steam sterilization cycle with a 

positive biological indicator (243). This more conservative approach should always be used for sterilization methods other 
than steam (e.g., dry heat, unsaturated chemical vapor, ETO, or hydrogen peroxide gas plasma) 
(243).

Results of biological monitoring should be recorded and sterilization monitoring records (i.e., mechanical, chemical, 
and biological) retained long enough to comply with state and 

local regulations. Such records are a component of an overall dental infection-control program (see Program Evaluation). 

Storage of Sterilized Items and Clean Dental Supplies 

The storage area should contain enclosed storage for sterile items and disposable (single-use) items 
(173). Storage practices for wrapped sterilized instruments can be either date- or event-related. Packages containing sterile supplies should be inspected before use to verify barrier integrity and dryness. Although some health-care facilities continue to date every sterilized 
package and use shelf-life practices, other facilities have switched to event-related practices 
(243). This approach recognizes that the product should remain sterile indefinitely, unless an event causes it to become contaminated (e.g., torn or wet packaging) (284). Even for event-related packaging, minimally, the date of sterilization should be placed on the package, and if 

multiple sterilizers are used in the facility, the sterilizer used should be indicated on the outside of the packaging material to facilitate 
the retrieval of processed items in the event of a sterilization failure (247). If packaging is compromised, the instruments should 

be recleaned, packaged in new wrap, and sterilized again.

Clean supplies and instruments should be stored in closed or covered cabinets, if possible 
(285). Dental supplies and instruments should not be stored under sinks or in other locations where they might become wet. 
Environmental Infection Control

 In the dental operatory, environmental surfaces (i.e., a surface or equipment that does not contact patients directly) 

can become contaminated during patient care. Certain surfaces, especially ones touched frequently (e.g., light handles, unit switches, and drawer knobs) can serve as reservoirs of microbial contamination, although they have not been associated directly with transmission of infection to either DHCP or patients. Transfer of microorganisms from 
contaminated environmental surfaces to patients occurs primarily through DHCP hand contact 

(286,287). When these surfaces are touched, microbial agents can be transferred to instruments, other environmental surfaces, or to the nose, mouth, or eyes of workers or patients. Although hand hygiene is key to minimizing this transferal, barrier protection or cleaning and disinfecting 
of environmental surfaces also protects against health-care--associated infections.

Environmental surfaces can be divided into clinical contact surfaces and housekeeping surfaces 
(249). Because housekeeping surfaces (e.g., floors, walls, and sinks) have limited risk of disease transmission, they can be decontaminated with less 
rigorous methods than those used on dental patient-care items and clinical contact surfaces 
(244). Strategies for cleaning and disinfecting surfaces in patient-care areas should consider the 1) potential for direct patient contact; 2) degree and frequency of hand contact; and 3) potential contamination of the surface with body substances or environmental sources of 
microorganisms (e.g., soil, dust, or water).

Cleaning is the necessary first step of any disinfection process. Cleaning is a form of decontamination that renders 

the environmental surface safe by removing organic matter, salts, and visible soils, all of which interfere with microbial inactivation. The physical action of scrubbing with detergents and surfactants and rinsing with water removes substantial numbers of microorganisms. If a surface is not cleaned first, the success of the disinfection process can be compromised. 
Removal of all visible blood and inorganic and organic matter can be as critical as the germicidal activity of the disinfecting agent (249). When a surface cannot be cleaned adequately, it should be protected with barriers 
(2).

Clinical Contact Surfaces

Clinical contact surfaces can be directly contaminated from patient materials either by direct spray or spatter 

generated during dental procedures or by contact with DHCP's gloved hands. These surfaces can subsequently contaminate other instruments, devices, hands, or gloves. Examples of such surfaces include

light handles,

switches,
dental radiograph equipment,
dental chairside computers,

reusable containers of dental materials,
drawer handles,

faucet handles,
countertops,
pens,
telephones, and
doorknobs.

 Barrier protection of surfaces and equipment can prevent contamination of clinical contact surfaces, but is 
particularly effective for those that are difficult to clean. Barriers include clear plastic wrap, bags, sheets, tubing, and plastic-backed paper or other materials impervious to moisture 
(260,288). Because such coverings can become contaminated, they should be 
removed and discarded between patients, while DHCP are still gloved. After removing the barrier, examine the surface to make sure 
it did not become soiled inadvertently. The surface needs to be cleaned and disinfected only if contamination is 
evident. Otherwise, after removing gloves and performing hand hygiene, DHCP should place clean barriers on these surfaces before 
the next patient (1,2,288).

If barriers are not used, surfaces should be cleaned and disinfected between patients by using an EPA-registered 
hospital disinfectant with an HIV, HBV claim (i.e., low-level disinfectant) or a tuberculocidal claim (i.e., 
intermediate-level disinfectant). Intermediate-level disinfectant should be used when the surface is visibly contaminated with blood or OPIM (2,244). Also, general cleaning and disinfection are recommended for clinical contact surfaces, dental unit surfaces, 

and countertops at the end of daily work activities and are required if surfaces have become contaminated since their last cleaning (13). To facilitate daily cleaning, treatment areas should be kept free of unnecessary equipment and supplies. 
Manufacturers of dental devices and equipment should provide information regarding material compatibility with 
liquid chemical germicides, whether equipment can be safely immersed for cleaning, and how it should be decontaminated 
if servicing is required (289). Because of the risks associated with exposure to chemical disinfectants and contaminated surfaces, DHCP who perform environmental cleaning and disinfection should wear gloves and other PPE to prevent 

occupational exposure to infectious agents and hazardous chemicals. Chemical- and puncture-resistant utility gloves 
offer more protection than patient examination gloves when using hazardous chemicals.

Housekeeping Surfaces

Evidence does not support that housekeeping surfaces (e.g., floors, walls, and sinks) pose a risk for disease transmission 
in dental health-care settings. Actual, physical removal of microorganisms and soil by wiping or scrubbing is probably as critical, if not more so, than any antimicrobial effect provided by the agent used 
(244,290). The majority of housekeeping surfaces 
need to be cleaned only with a detergent and water or an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant/detergent, depending on the nature 
of the surface and the type and degree of contamination. Schedules and methods vary according to the area (e.g., dental 
operatory, laboratory, bathrooms, or reception rooms), surface, and amount and type of contamination.

Floors should be cleaned regularly, and spills should be cleaned up promptly. An EPA-registered hospital 
disinfectant/detergent designed for general housekeeping purposes should be used in patient-care areas if uncertainty exists regarding the nature of the soil on the surface (e.g., blood or body fluid contamination versus routine dust or dirt). Unless contamination 

is reasonably anticipated or apparent, cleaning or disinfecting walls, window drapes, and other vertical surfaces is 
unnecessary. However, when housekeeping surfaces are visibly contaminated by blood or OPIM, prompt removal and surface disinfection is appropriate infection-control practice and required by OSHA 
(13).

Part of the cleaning strategy is to minimize contamination of cleaning solutions and cleaning tools (e.g., mop heads 
or cleaning cloths). Mops and cloths should be cleaned after use and allowed to dry before reuse, or single-use, disposable 
mop heads and cloths should be used to avoid spreading contamination. Cost, safety, product-surface compatibility, 

and acceptability by housekeepers can be key criteria for selecting a cleaning agent or an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant/detergent. PPE used during cleaning and housekeeping procedures followed should be appropriate to the task. 
In the cleaning process, another reservoir for microorganisms can be dilute solutions of detergents or disinfectants, especially if prepared in dirty containers, stored for long periods of time, or prepared incorrectly 
(244). Manufacturers' instructions for preparation and use should be followed. Making fresh cleaning solution each day, discarding any remaining solution, and allowing the container to dry will minimize bacterial contamination. Preferred cleaning methods 
produce minimal mists and aerosols or dispersion of dust in patient-care areas.

Cleaning and Disinfection Strategies for Blood Spills

The majority of blood contamination events in dentistry result from spatter during dental procedures using rotary 
or ultrasonic instrumentation. Although no evidence supports that HBV, HCV, or HIV have been transmitted from 
a housekeeping surface, prompt removal and surface disinfection of an area contaminated by either blood or OPIM 
are appropriate infection-control practices and required by OSHA 
(13,291).

Strategies for decontaminating spills of blood and other body fluids differ by setting and volume of the spill 
(113,244). Blood spills on either clinical contact or housekeeping surfaces should be contained and managed as quickly as possible 
to reduce the risk of contact by patients and DHCP 
(244,292). The person assigned to clean the spill should wear gloves 

and other PPE as needed. Visible organic material should be removed with 
absorbent material (e.g., disposable paper towels discarded in a leak-proof, appropriately labeled container). Nonporous surfaces should be cleaned and then decontaminated with either an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant effective against HBV and HIV or an EPA-registered hospital 

disinfectant with a tuberculocidal claim (i.e., intermediate-level disinfectant). If sodium hypochlorite is chosen, an EPA-registered sodium hypochlorite product is preferred. However, if such products are unavailable, a 1:100 dilution of sodium hypochlorite 
(e.g., approximately ¼ cup of 5.25% household chlorine bleach to 1 gallon of water) is an inexpensive and effective disinfecting agent (113).

Carpeting and Cloth Furnishings

Carpeting is more difficult to clean than nonporous hard-surface flooring, and it cannot be reliably disinfected, especially after spills of blood and body substances. Studies have documented the presence of diverse microbial populations, primarily bacteria and fungi, in carpeting 
(293--295). Cloth furnishings pose similar contamination risks in areas of direct patient 
care and places where contaminated materials are managed (e.g., dental operatory, laboratory, or instrument processing areas). For these reasons, use of carpeted flooring and fabric-upholstered furnishings in these areas should be avoided.

Nonregulated and Regulated Medical Waste

Studies have compared microbial load and diversity of microorganisms in residential waste with waste from multiple 
health-care settings. General waste from hospitals or other health-care facilities (e.g., dental practices or clinical/research laboratories) is no more infective than residential waste 
(296,297). The majority of soiled items in dental offices are general medical 
waste and thus can be disposed of with ordinary waste. Examples include used gloves, masks, gowns, lightly soiled gauze or 
cotton rolls, and environmental barriers (e.g., plastic sheets or bags) used to cover equipment during treatment 
(298).

Although any item that has had contact with blood, exudates, or secretions might be infective, treating all such waste 
as infective is neither necessary nor practical 
(244). Infectious waste that carries a substantial risk of causing infection 
during handling and disposal is regulated medical waste. A complete definition of regulated waste is included in OSHA's 
bloodborne pathogens standard (13).

Regulated medical waste is only a limited subset of waste: 9%--15% of total waste in hospitals and 1%--2% of total waste 
in dental offices (298,299). Regulated medical waste requires special storage, handling, neutralization, and disposal and is covered by federal, state, and local rules and regulations 

(6,297,300,301). Examples of regulated waste found in dental-practice 
settings are solid waste soaked or saturated with blood or saliva (e.g., gauze saturated with blood after surgery), extracted teeth, surgically removed hard and soft tissues, and contaminated sharp items (e.g., needles, scalpel blades, and wires) (13).

Regulated medical waste requires careful containment for treatment or disposal. A single leak-resistant biohazard bag 

is usually adequate for containment of nonsharp regulated medical waste, provided the bag is sturdy and the waste can 
be discarded without contaminating the bag's exterior. Exterior contamination or puncturing of the bag requires placement in 
a second biohazard bag. All bags should be securely closed for disposal. Puncture-resistant containers with a biohazard 
label, located at the point of use (i.e., sharps containers), are used as containment for scalpel blades, needles, syringes, and unused sterile sharps (13).

Dental health-care facilities should dispose of medical waste regularly to avoid accumulation. Any facility 
generating regulated medical waste should have a plan for its management that complies with federal, state, and local regulations to ensure health and environmental safety.

Discharging Blood or Other Body Fluids to Sanitary Sewers or Septic Tanks

All containers with blood or saliva (e.g., suctioned fluids) can be inactivated in accordance with state-approved 
treatment technologies, or the contents can be carefully poured down a utility sink, drain, or toilet 
(6). Appropriate PPE (e.g., gloves, gown, mask, and protective eyewear) should be worn when performing this task 
(13). No evidence exists that bloodborne diseases have been transmitted from contact with raw or treated sewage. Multiple bloodborne pathogens, particularly viruses, are not stable in the environment for long periods 
(302), and the discharge of limited quantities of blood and other body 
fluids into the sanitary sewer is considered a safe method for disposing of these waste materials 
(6). State and local regulations vary and dictate whether blood or other body fluids require pretreatment or if they can be discharged into the sanitary sewer and in what volume.

Dental Unit Waterlines, Biofilm, and Water Quality

 Studies have demonstrated that dental unit waterlines (i.e., narrow-bore plastic tubing that carries water to the 
high-speed handpiece, air/water syringe, and ultrasonic scaler) can become colonized with microorganisms, including bacteria, fungi, 

and protozoa (303--309). Protected by a polysaccharide slime layer known as a glycocalyx, these microorganisms colonize and replicate on the interior surfaces of the waterline tubing and form a biofilm, which serves as a reservoir that can amplify the number of free-floating (i.e., planktonic) microorganisms in water used for dental treatment. Although oral 
flora (303,310,311) and human pathogens (e.g., 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa 

[303,305,312,313], Legionella species [303,306,313], and nontuberculous 
Mycobacterium species [303,304]), have been isolated from dental water systems, the majority of organisms recovered from dental waterlines are common heterotrophic water bacteria 
(305,314,315). These exhibit limited 

pathogenic potential for immunocompetent persons.

Clinical Implications

Certain reports associate waterborne infections with dental water systems, and scientific evidence verifies the potential for transmission of waterborne infections and disease in hospital settings and in the community 
(306,312,316). Infection or colonization caused by 
Pseudomonas species or nontuberculous mycobacteria can occur among susceptible patients 

through direct contact with water (317--320) or after exposure to 
residual waterborne contamination of inadequately 
reprocessed medical instruments (321--323). Nontuberculous mycobacteria can also be transmitted to patients from tap water aerosols (324). Health-care--associated transmission of pathogenic agents (e.g., 
Legionella species) occurs primarily through 
inhalation of infectious aerosols generated from potable water sources or through use of tap water in respiratory therapy equipment (325--327). Disease outbreaks in the community have also been reported from diverse environmental 
aerosol-producing sources, including whirlpool spas 
(328), swimming pools (329), and a grocery store mist machine 

(330). Although the majority of these outbreaks are associated with species of Legionella and Pseudomonas 
(329), the fungus Cladosporium (331) has also been implicated. 

Researchers have not demonstrated a measurable risk of adverse health effects among DHCP or patients from exposure 
to dental water. Certain studies determined DHCP had altered nasal flora 
(332) or substantially greater titers of 
Legionella antibodies in comparisons with control populations; however, no cases of legionellosis were identified among exposed DHCP (333,334). Contaminated dental water might have been the source for localized 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections in two immunocompromised patients 
(312). Although transient carriage of P. 

aeruginosa was observed in 78 healthy patients 
treated with contaminated dental treatment water, no illness was reported among the group. In this same study, a retrospective 
review of dental records also failed to identify infections 
(312).

Concentrations of bacterial endotoxin 
<1,000 endotoxin units/mL from gram-negative water bacteria have been detected 
in water from colonized dental units (335). No standards exist for an acceptable level of endotoxin in drinking water, but 
the maximum level permissible in United States Pharmacopeia (USP) sterile water for irrigation is only 0.25 endotoxin 
units/mL (336). Although the consequences of acute and chronic exposure to aerosolized endotoxin in dental health-care settings have not been investigated, endotoxin has been associated with exacerbation of asthma and onset of hypersensitivity pneumonitis 

in other occupational settings (329,337).

Dental Unit Water Quality

Research has demonstrated that microbial counts can reach <200,000 colony-forming units (CFU)/mL within 5 days after installation of new dental unit waterlines (305), and levels of microbial contamination <106 CFU/mL of dental unit 

water have been documented (309,338). These counts can occur because dental unit waterline factors (e.g., system design, flow rates, and materials) promote both bacterial growth and development of biofilm.

Although no epidemiologic evidence indicates a public health problem, the presence of substantial numbers of pathogens 
in dental unit waterlines generates concern. Exposing patients or DHCP to water of uncertain microbiological quality, despite the lack of documented adverse health effects, is inconsistent with accepted infection-control principles. Thus in 1995, 

ADA addressed the dental water concern by asking manufacturers to provide equipment with the ability to deliver treatment 
water with <200 CFU/mL of unfiltered output from waterlines 
(339). This threshold was based on the quality assurance 
standard established for dialysate fluid, to ensure that fluid delivery systems in hemodialysis units have not been colonized by indigenous waterborne organisms (340).

Standards also exist for safe drinking water quality as established by EPA, the American Public Health Association 

(APHA), and the American Water Works Association (AWWA); they have set limits for heterotrophic bacteria of <500 CFU/mL of drinking water 
(341,342). Thus, the number of bacteria in water used as a coolant/irrigant for nonsurgical dental procedures should be as low as reasonably achievable and, at a minimum, 

<500 CFU/mL, the regulatory standard for safe drinking 
water established by EPA and APHA/AWWA.

Strategies To Improve Dental Unit Water Quality

In 1993, CDC recommended that dental waterlines be flushed at the beginning of the clinic day to reduce the microbial 
load (2). However, studies have demonstrated this practice does not affect biofilm in the waterlines or reliably improve the quality of water used during dental treatment 

(315,338,343). Because the recommended value of 
<500 CFU/mL cannot be achieved by using this method, other strategies should be employed. Dental unit water that remains untreated or unfiltered is unlikely to meet drinking water standards (303--309). Commercial devices and procedures designed to improve the quality of water 

used in dental treatment are available (316); methods demonstrated to be effective include self-contained water systems 
combined with chemical treatment, in-line microfilters, and combinations of these treatments. Simply using source water 
containing <500 CFU/mL of bacteria (e.g., tap, distilled, or sterile water) in a self-contained water system will not eliminate bacterial contamination in treatment water if biofilms in the water system are not controlled. Removal or inactivation of dental waterline biofilms requires use of chemical germicides.

Patient material (e.g., oral microorganisms, blood, and saliva) can enter the dental water system during patient 
treatment (311,344). Dental devices that are connected to the dental water system and that enter the patient's mouth (e.g., handpieces, ultrasonic scalers, or air/water syringes) should be operated to discharge water and air for a minimum of 20--30 seconds 
after each patient (2). This procedure is intended to physically flush out patient material that might have entered the turbine, air, or waterlines. The majority of recently manufactured dental units are engineered to prevent retraction of oral fluids, but 

some older dental units are equipped with antiretraction valves that require periodic maintenance. Users should consult the owner's manual or contact the manufacturer to determine whether testing or maintenance of antiretraction valves or other devices is required. Even with antiretraction valves, flushing devices for a minimum of 20--30 seconds after each patient is recommended. 

Maintenance and Monitoring of Dental Unit Water

DHCP should be trained regarding water quality, biofilm formation, water treatment methods, and appropriate 

maintenance protocols for water delivery systems. Water treatment and monitoring products require strict adherence to 
maintenance protocols, and noncompliance with treatment regimens has been associated with persistence of microbial contamination in treated systems (345). Clinical monitoring of water quality can ensure that procedures are correctly performed and that devices are working in accordance with the manufacturer's previously validated protocol.

Dentists should consult with the manufacturer of their dental unit or water delivery system to determine the best method 
for maintaining acceptable water quality (i.e., 
<500 CFU/mL) and the recommended frequency of monitoring. Monitoring of 
dental water quality can be performed by using commercial self-contained test kits or commercial water-testing laboratories. Because methods used to treat dental water systems target the entire biofilm, no rationale exists for routine testing for such specific organisms as Legionella or 
Pseudomonas, except when investigating a suspected waterborne disease outbreak 
(244).

Delivery of Sterile Surgical Irrigation

Sterile solutions (e.g., sterile saline or sterile water) should be used as a coolant/irrigation in the performance of oral surgical procedures where a greater opportunity exists for entry of 

microorganisms, exogenous and endogenous, into the vascular 
system and other normally sterile areas that support the oral cavity (e.g., bone or subcutaneous tissue) and increased potential exists for localized or systemic infection (see Oral Surgical Procedures). Conventional dental units cannot reliably deliver sterile water even when equipped with independent water reservoirs because the water-bearing pathway cannot be reliably sterilized. 
Delivery devices (e.g., bulb syringe or sterile, single-use disposable products) should be used to 

deliver sterile water (2,121). Oral surgery and implant handpieces, as well as ultrasonic scalers, are commercially available that bypass the dental unit to deliver sterile water or other solutions by using single-use disposable or sterilizable tubing 
(316).

Boil-Water Advisories

A boil-water advisory is a public health announcement that the public should boil tap water before drinking it. When 
issued, the public should assume the water is unsafe to drink. Advisories can be issued after 1) failure of or substantial interruption 
in water treatment processes that result in increased turbidity levels or particle counts and mechanical or equipment failure; 
2) positive test results for pathogens (e.g., 
Cryptosporidium, Giardia, or 
Shigella) in water; 3) violations of the total coliform rule 
or the turbidity standard of the surface water treatment rule; 4) circumstances that compromise the distribution system 

(e.g., watermain break) coupled with an indication of a health hazard; or 5) a natural disaster (e.g., flood, hurricane, or earthquake) (346). In recent years, increased 
numbers of boil-water advisories have resulted from contamination of public drinking 
water systems with waterborne pathogens. Most notable was the outbreak of cryptosporidiosis in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, where the municipal water system was contaminated with the protozoan parasite 
Cryptosporidium parvum. An estimated 403,000 

persons became ill (347,348).

During a boil-water advisory, water should not be delivered to patients through the dental unit, ultrasonic scaler, or other dental equipment that uses the public water system. This 

restriction does not apply if the water source is isolated from 
the municipal water system (e.g., a separate water reservoir or other water treatment device cleared for marketing by FDA). 
Patients should rinse with bottled or distilled water until the boil-water advisory has been cancelled. During these advisory periods, tap water should not be used to dilute germicides or for hand hygiene unless the water has been brought to a rolling boil for >1 minute and cooled before use 
(346,349--351). For hand hygiene, antimicrobial products that do not require water 
(e.g., alcohol-based hand rubs) can be used until the boil-water notice is cancelled. If hands are visibly contaminated, bottled 

water and soap should be used for handwashing; if bottled water is not immediately available, an antiseptic towelette should be used (13,122).

When the advisory is cancelled, the local water utility should provide guidance for flushing of waterlines to reduce residual microbial contamination. All incoming waterlines from the public water system inside the dental office (e.g., faucets, waterlines, and dental equipment) should be flushed. No consensus exists regarding the optimal duration for flushing procedures after cancellation of the advisory; recommendations range from 1 to 5 minutes 
(244,346,351,352). The length of time needed can 
vary with the type and length of the plumbing system leading to the office. After the incoming public water system lines are flushed, dental unit waterlines should be disinfected according to the manufacturer's instructions 
(346).

Special Considerations

Dental Handpieces and Other Devices Attached to Air and Waterlines

 Multiple semicritical dental devices that touch mucous membranes are attached to the air or waterlines of the dental 

unit. Among these devices are high- and low-speed handpieces, prophylaxis angles, ultrasonic and sonic scaling tips, air abrasion devices, and air and water syringe tips. Although no epidemiologic evidence implicates these instruments in 
disease transmission (353), studies of high-speed handpieces using dye expulsion have confirmed the potential for retracting oral 
fluids into internal compartments of the device 
(354--358). This determination indicates that retained patient material can 
be expelled intraorally during subsequent uses. Studies using laboratory models also indicate the possibility for retention of 
viral DNA and viable virus inside both high-speed handpieces and prophylaxis angles 
(356,357,359). The potential for contamination of the internal surfaces of other devices (e.g., low-speed handpieces and ultrasonic scalers), has not been studied, 

but restricted physical access limits their cleaning. Accordingly, any dental device connected to the dental air/water system 

that enters the patient's mouth should be run to discharge water, air, or a combination for a minimum of 20--30 seconds after 
each patient (2). This procedure is intended to help physically flush out patient material that might have entered the turbine and air and waterlines (2,356,357).

Heat methods can sterilize dental handpieces and other intraoral devices attached to air or waterlines 
(246,275,356, 357,360). For processing any dental device that can be 
removed from the dental unit air or waterlines, neither 
surface disinfection nor immersion in chemical germicides is an 
acceptable method. Ethylene oxide gas cannot adequately 
sterilize internal components of handpieces 
(250,275). In clinical evaluations of high-speed handpieces, cleaning and lubrication 
were the most critical factors in determining performance and durability 
(361--363). Manufacturer's instructions for 
cleaning, lubrication, and sterilization should be followed closely to ensure both the effectiveness of the process and the longevity 
of handpieces.

Some components of dental instruments are permanently attached to dental unit waterlines and although they do not 
enter the patient's oral cavity, they are likely to become contaminated with oral fluids during treatment procedures. Such 
components (e.g., handles or dental unit attachments of saliva ejectors, high-speed air evacuators, and air/water syringes) should be covered with impervious barriers that are changed after each use. If the item becomes visibly contaminated during use, DHCP 

should clean and disinfect with an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant (intermediate-level) before use on the next patient. 
Saliva Ejectors

 Backflow from low-volume saliva ejectors occurs when the pressure in the patient's mouth is less than that in the evacuator. Studies have reported that backflow in low-volume suction lines can occur and microorganisms be present in the lines retracted into the patient's mouth when a seal around the 
saliva ejector is created (e.g., by a patient closing lips around the tip of 
the ejector, creating a partial vacuum) 
(364--366). This backflow can be a potential source of cross-contamination; occurrence 
is variable because the quality of the seal formed varies between patients. Furthermore, studies have demonstrated that 

gravity pulls fluid back toward the patient's mouth whenever a length of the suction tubing holding the tip is positioned above 
the patient's mouth, or during simultaneous use of other evacuation (high-volume) equipment 
(364--366). Although no adverse health effects associated with the saliva ejector have been reported, practitioners should be aware that in certain situations, backflow could occur when using a saliva ejector.

Dental Radiology

 When taking radiographs, the potential to cross-contaminate equipment and environmental surfaces with blood or 
saliva is high if aseptic technique is not practiced. Gloves should be worn when taking radiographs and handling contaminated 

film packets. Other PPE (e.g., mask, protective eyewear, and gowns) should be used if spattering of blood or other body fluids 
is likely (11,13,367). Heat-tolerant versions of intraoral radiograph accessories are available and these semicritical items (e.g., film-holding and positioning devices) should be heat-sterilized before patient use.

After exposure of the radiograph and before glove removal, the film should be dried with disposable gauze or a paper towel 

to remove blood or excess saliva and placed in a container (e.g., disposable cup) for transport to the developing area. Alternatively, if FDA-cleared film barrier pouches are used, the film packets should be carefully removed from the pouch to avoid contamination of the outside film packet and placed in the clean container for transport to the developing area. 
Various methods have been recommended for aseptic transport of exposed films to the developing area, and for removing 
the outer film packet before exposing and developing the film. Other information regarding dental radiography infection control is available (260,367,368). However, care should be taken to avoid contamination of the developing equipment. 
Protective barriers should be used, or any surfaces that 

become contaminated should be cleaned and disinfected with an 
EPA-registered hospital disinfectant of low- (i.e., HIV and HBV claim) to intermediate-level (i.e., tuberculocidal claim) activity. Radiography equipment (e.g., radiograph tubehead and control panel) should be protected with surface barriers that are changed after each patient. If barriers are not used, equipment that has come into contact with DHCP's gloved hands or contaminated 
film packets should be cleaned and then disinfected after each patient use.

Digital radiography sensors and other high-technology 

instruments (e.g., intraoral camera, electronic periodontal 
probe, occlusal analyzers, and lasers) come into contact with mucous membranes and are considered semicritical devices. They 
should 

be cleaned and ideally heat-sterilized or high-level disinfected between patients. However, these items vary by manufacturer 
or type of device in their ability to be sterilized or high-level disinfected. Semicritical items that cannot be reprocessed by 
heat sterilization or high-level disinfection should, at a minimum, be barrier protected by using an FDA-cleared barrier to 
reduce gross contamination during use. Use of a barrier does not always protect from contamination 
(369--374). One study determined that a brand of commercially available plastic barriers used to protect dental digital radiography sensors failed at a substantial rate (44%). This rate dropped to 6% when latex finger cots were used in conjunction with the plastic barrier 

(375). To minimize the potential for device-associated infections, after removing the barrier, the device should be cleaned and disinfected with an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant (intermediate-level) after each patient. Manufacturers should 
be consulted regarding appropriate barrier and disinfection/sterilization procedures for digital radiography sensors, other high-technology intraoral devices, and computer components.

Aseptic Technique for Parenteral Medications

 Safe handling of parenteral medications and fluid infusion systems is required to prevent health-care--associated infections among patients undergoing conscious sedation. Parenteral medications can be packaged in single-dose ampules, vials or prefilled syringes, usually without bacteriostatic/preservative agents, and intended for use on a single patient. Multidose vials, used for more than one patient, can have a preservative, but both types of containers of medication should be handled with aseptic techniques to prevent contamination.

Single-dose vials should be used for parenteral medications whenever possible 
(376,377). Single-dose vials might pose a 
risk for contamination if they are punctured repeatedly. The leftover contents of a single-dose vial should be discarded and never combined with medications for use on another patient 

(376,377). Medication from a single-dose syringe should not 
be administered to multiple patients, even if the needle on the syringe is changed 
(378).

The overall risk for extrinsic contamination of multidose vials is probably minimal, although the consequences of contamination might result in life-threatening infection 

(379). If necessary to use a multidose vial, its access diaphragm 
should be cleansed with 70% alcohol before inserting a sterile device into the vial (380,381). A multidose vial should be discarded 

if sterility is compromised (380,381).

Medication vials, syringes, or supplies should not be carried in uniform or clothing pockets. If trays are used to 
deliver medications to individual patients, they should be cleaned between patients. To further reduce the chance of contamination, all medication vials should be restricted to a centralized medication preparation area separate from the treatment area 

(382).

All fluid infusion and administration sets (e.g., IV bags, tubing, and connections) are single-patient use because 
sterility cannot be guaranteed when an infusion or administration set is used on multiple patients. Aseptic technique should be used when preparing IV infusion and administration sets, and 
entry into or breaks in the tubing should be minimized 
(378).

Single-Use or Disposable Devices

 A single-use device, also called a disposable device, is 

designed to be used on one patient and then discarded, not 
reprocessed for use on another patient (e.g., cleaned, disinfected, or sterilized) (383). Single-use devices in dentistry are usually not 

heat-tolerant and cannot be reliably cleaned. Examples include syringe needles, prophylaxis cups and brushes, and 
plastic orthodontic brackets. Certain items (e.g., prophylaxis angles, saliva ejectors, high-volume evacuator tips, and air/water syringe tips) are commonly available in a disposable form and should be disposed of appropriately after each use. Single-use devices and items (e.g., cotton rolls, gauze, and irrigating syringes) for use during oral surgical procedures should be sterile at the time of use.

Because of the physical construction of certain devices (e.g., burs, endodontic files, and broaches) cleaning can be difficult. In addition, deterioration can occur on the cutting surfaces of some carbide/diamond burs and endodontic files during 

processing (384) and after repeated processing cycles, leading to potential breakage during patient treatment 
(385--388). These factors, coupled with the knowledge that burs and endodontic instruments exhibit signs of wear during normal use, might make it practical to consider them as single-use devices.

Preprocedural Mouth Rinses

 Antimicrobial mouth rinses used by patients before a dental procedure are intended to reduce the number of 
microorganisms the patient might release in the form of aerosols or spatter that subsequently can contaminate DHCP and equipment 
operatory surfaces. In addition, preprocedural rinsing can 

decrease the number of microorganisms introduced in the patient's 
bloodstream during invasive dental procedures 
(389,390).

No scientific evidence indicates that preprocedural mouth rinsing prevents clinical infections among DHCP or patients, 
but studies have demonstrated that a preprocedural rinse with an antimicrobial product (e.g., chlorhexidine 
gluconate, essential oils, or povidone-iodine) can reduce the level of oral microorganisms in aerosols and spatter generated during 
routine dental procedures with rotary instruments (e.g., dental handpieces or ultrasonic scalers) 
(391--399). Preprocedural mouth rinses can be most beneficial before a procedure that requires using a prophylaxis cup or ultrasonic scaler because rubber dams cannot be used to minimize aerosol and spatter generation and, unless the provider has an assistant, 
high-volume evacuation is not commonly used 
(173).

The science is unclear concerning the incidence and nature of bacteremias from oral procedures, the relationship of 
these bacteremias to disease, and the preventive benefit of antimicrobial rinses. In limited studies, no substantial benefit has 
been demonstrated for mouth rinsing in terms of reducing oral microorganisms in dental-induced bacteremias 
(400,401). However, the American Heart Association's recommendations regarding preventing bacterial endocarditis during dental procedures 
(402) provide limited support concerning preprocedural mouth rinsing with an antimicrobial as an 
adjunct for patients at risk for bacterial endocarditis. Insufficient data exist to recommend preprocedural mouth rinses to prevent clinical infections 
among patients or DHCP.

Oral Surgical Procedures

 The oral cavity is colonized with numerous microorganisms. Oral surgical procedures present an opportunity for entry 

of microorganisms (i.e., exogenous and endogenous) into the vascular system and other normally sterile areas of the oral 
cavity (e.g., bone or subcutaneous tissue); therefore, an 
increased potential exists for localized or systemic infection. Oral 
surgical procedures involve the incision, excision, or 
reflection of tissue that exposes the normally sterile areas of the oral 
cavity. Examples include biopsy, periodontal surgery, apical surgery, implant surgery, and surgical extractions of teeth (e.g., removal of erupted or nonerupted tooth requiring elevation of mucoperiosteal flap, removal of bone or section of tooth, and suturing 
if needed) (see Hand Hygiene, PPE, Single Use or Disposable Devices, and Dental Unit Water Quality).

Handling of Biopsy Specimens

 To protect persons handling and transporting biopsy specimens, each specimen must be placed in a sturdy, 

leakproof container with a secure lid for transportation 
(13). Care should be taken when collecting the specimen to avoid 
contaminating the outside of the container. If the outside of the container becomes visibly contaminated, it should be cleaned and disinfected or placed in an impervious bag 
(2,13). The container must be labeled with the biohazard symbol during storage, 
transport, shipment, and disposal (13,14).

Handling of Extracted Teeth

Disposal

Extracted teeth that are being discarded are subject to the containerization and labeling provisions outlined by 
OSHA's bloodborne pathogens standard (13). OSHA considers 

extracted teeth to be potentially infectious material that should 
be disposed in medical waste containers. Extracted teeth sent to a dental laboratory for shade or size comparisons should 
be cleaned, surface-disinfected with an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant with intermediate-level activity (i.e., tuberculocidal claim), and transported in a manner consistent with OSHA regulations. However, extracted teeth can be returned to patients on request, at which time provisions of the standard no longer apply 
(14). Extracted teeth containing dental 
amalgam should not be placed in a medical waste container that uses incineration for final disposal. Commercial metal-recycling companies also might accept extracted teeth with metal restorations, including amalgam. State and local regulations should be consulted regarding disposal of the amalgam.

Educational Settings

Extracted teeth are occasionally collected for use in preclinical educational training. These teeth should be cleaned of visible blood and gross debris and maintained in a hydrated state in a well-constructed closed container during transport. The container should be labeled with the biohazard symbol 

(13,14). Because these teeth will be autoclaved before clinical 
exercises or study, use of the most economical storage solution (e.g., water or saline) might be practical. Liquid chemical germicides can also be used but do not reliably disinfect both external surface and interior pulp tissue 
(403,404).

Before being used in an educational setting, the teeth should be heat-sterilized to allow safe handling. Microbial growth 
can be eliminated by using an autoclave cycle for 40 minutes 

(405), but because preclinical educational exercises simulate 
clinical experiences, students enrolled in dental programs should still follow standard precautions. Autoclaving teeth for preclinical laboratory exercises does not appear to alter their physical properties sufficiently to compromise the learning experience (405,406). However, whether autoclave sterilization of 

extracted teeth affects dentinal structure to the point that the 
chemical and microchemical relationship between dental 
materials and the dentin would be affected for research purposes on 
dental materials is unknown (406).

Use of teeth that do not contain amalgam is preferred in educational settings because they can be safely 
autoclaved (403,405). Extracted teeth containing amalgam restorations should not be heat-sterilized because of the potential health hazard from mercury vaporization and exposure. If extracted teeth containing amalgam restorations are to be used, immersion in 

10% formalin solution for 2 weeks should be effective in disinfecting both the internal and external structures of the teeth (403). If using formalin, manufacturer MSDS should be reviewed for occupational safety and health concerns and to ensure compliance with OSHA regulations (15).

Dental Laboratory

 Dental prostheses, appliances, and items used in their fabrication (e.g., impressions, occlusal rims, and bite registrations) 
are potential sources for cross-contamination and should be handled in a manner that prevents exposure of DHCP, 
patients, or the office environment to infectious agents. Effective communication and coordination between the laboratory and dental practice will ensure that appropriate cleaning and disinfection procedures are performed in the dental office or laboratory, materials are not damaged or distorted because of disinfectant overexposure, and effective disinfection procedures are not 
unnecessarily duplicated (407,408).

When a laboratory case is sent off-site, DHCP should provide written information regarding the methods (e.g., type 

of disinfectant and exposure time) used to clean and disinfect the material (e.g., impression, stone model, or appliance) (2,407,409). Clinical materials that are not decontaminated are subject to OSHA and U.S. Department of Transportation regulations regarding transportation and shipping of infectious materials 
(13,410).

Appliances and prostheses delivered to the patient should be free of contamination. Communication between the 

laboratory and the dental practice is also key at this stage to determine which one is responsible for the final disinfection process. If the dental laboratory staff provides the disinfection, an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant (low to intermediate) should be 
used, written documentation of the disinfection method provided, and the item placed in a tamper-evident container 
before returning it to the dental office. If such documentation is not provided, the dental office is responsible for final 
disinfection procedures.

Dental prostheses or impressions brought into the laboratory can be contaminated with bacteria, viruses, and 
fungi (411,412). Dental prostheses, impressions, orthodontic 
appliances, and other prosthodontic materials (e.g., occlusal 
rims, temporary prostheses, bite registrations, or extracted teeth) should be thoroughly cleaned (i.e., blood and bioburden 
removed), disinfected with an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant with a tuberculocidal claim, and thoroughly rinsed 
before being handled in the in-office laboratory or sent to an off-site laboratory 
(2,244,249,407). The best time to clean and 
disinfect impressions, prostheses, or appliances is as soon as possible after removal from the patient's mouth before drying of blood 
or other bioburden can occur. Specific guidance regarding cleaning and disinfecting techniques for various materials is 

available (260,413--416). DHCP are advised to consult with manufacturers regarding the stability of specific materials 
during disinfection.

In the laboratory, a separate receiving and disinfecting area should be established to reduce contamination in the 
production area. Bringing untreated items into the laboratory increases chances for cross infection 
(260). If no communication has been received regarding prior cleaning and disinfection of a material, the dental laboratory staff should perform cleaning and 

disinfection procedures before handling. If during 
manipulation of a material or appliance a previously undetected area 
of blood or bioburden becomes apparent, cleaning and disinfection procedures should be repeated. Transfer of 
oral microorganisms into and onto impressions has been documented 
(417--419). Movement of these organisms onto dental 
casts has also been demonstrated (420). Certain microbes have been demonstrated to remain viable within gypsum cast materials 
for <7 days (421). Incorrect handling of contaminated impressions, prostheses, or appliances, therefore, offers an opportunity 
for transmission of microorganisms (260). Whether in the office or laboratory, PPE should be worn until disinfection is 
completed (1,2,7,10,13).

If laboratory items (e.g., burs, polishing points, rag wheels, or laboratory knives) are used on contaminated or 
potentially contaminated appliances, prostheses, or other material, they should be heat-sterilized, disinfected between patients, or 
discarded (i.e., disposable items should be used) 
(260,407). Heat-tolerant items used in the mouth (e.g., metal impression tray or face 
bow fork) should be heat-sterilized before being used on another patient 
(2,407). Items that do not normally contact the 
patient, prosthetic device, or appliance but frequently become contaminated and cannot withstand heat-sterilization (e.g., articulators, 
case pans, or lathes) should be cleaned and disinfected between 

patients and according to the manufacturer's instructions. Pressure 
pots and water baths are particularly susceptible to contamination with microorganisms and should be cleaned and disinfected 
between patients (422). In the majority of instances, these items can be cleaned and disinfected with an 
EPA-registered hospital disinfectant. Environmental surfaces should be barrier-protected or cleaned and disinfected in the same manner as in the dental treatment area.

Unless waste generated in the dental laboratory (e.g., disposable trays or impression materials) falls under the category 

of regulated medical waste, it can be discarded with general waste. Personnel should dispose of sharp items (e.g., burs, 
disposable blades, and orthodontic wires) in puncture-resistant containers.

Laser/Electrosurgery Plumes or Surgical Smoke

 During surgical procedures that use a laser or electrosurgical unit, the thermal destruction of tissue creates a 
smoke byproduct. Laser plumes or surgical smoke represent another potential risk for DHCP 
(423--425). Lasers transfer electromagnetic energy into tissues, resulting in the release of a heated plume that includes particles, gases (e.g., hydrogen cyanide, benzene, and formaldehyde), tissue debris, viruses, and offensive odors. One concern is that aerosolized 

infectious material in the laser plume might reach the nasal mucosa of the laser operator and adjacent DHCP. Although certain viruses (e.g., varicella-zoster virus and herpes simplex virus) appear not to aerosolize efficiently 
(426,427), other viruses and various bacteria (e.g., human papilloma virus, HIV, coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, Corynebacterium species, and 

Neisseria species) have been detected in laser plumes 
(428--434). However, the presence of an infectious agent in a laser plume might not 
be sufficient to cause disease from airborne exposure, especially if the agent's normal mode of transmission is not airborne. 
No evidence indicates that HIV or HBV have been transmitted through aerosolization and inhalation 
(435). Although continuing studies are needed to evaluate the risk for DHCP of laser plumes and electrosurgery smoke, following NIOSH recommendations (425) and practices developed by the Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN) might 

be practical (436). These practices include using 1) standard precautions (e.g., high-filtration surgical masks and possibly full 
face shields) (437); 2) central room suction units with in-line filters to collect particulate matter from minimal plumes; and 3) dedicated mechanical smoke exhaust systems with a high-efficiency filter to remove substantial amounts of laser 

plume particles. Local smoke evacuation systems have been recommended by consensus organizations, and these systems can 
improve the quality of the operating field. Employers should be aware of this emerging problem and advise employees of the potential hazards of laser smoke (438). However, this concern remains unresolved in dental practice and no recommendation is provided here.

M. tuberculosis

 Patients infected with M. tuberculosis occasionally seek 
urgent dental treatment at outpatient dental settings. 
Understanding the pathogenesis of the development of TB will help DHCP determine how to manage such patients.

M. tuberculosis is a bacterium carried in airborne infective droplet nuclei that can be generated when persons with pulmonary or laryngeal TB sneeze, cough, speak, or sing 
(439). These small particles (1--5 µm) can stay suspended in the air for 
hours (440). Infection occurs when a susceptible person inhales droplet nuclei containing 
M. tuberculosis, which then travel to the 

alveoli of the lungs. Usually within 2--12 weeks after initial infection with 
M. tuberculosis, immune response prevents 
further spread of the TB bacteria, although they can remain alive in the lungs for years, a condition termed latent TB infection. Persons with latent TB infection usually exhibit a reactive tuberculin skin test (TST), have no symptoms of active disease, and are not infectious. However, they can develop active disease later in life if they do not receive treatment for their latent infection. 
Approximately 5% of persons who have been recently 
infected and not treated for latent TB infection will progress 
from infection to active disease during the first 1--2 years after infection; another 5% will develop active disease later in life. Thus, approximately 90% of U.S. persons with latent TB 
infection do not progress to active TB disease. Although both latent 
TB infection and active TB disease are described as TB, only the person with active disease is contagious and presents a risk 
of transmission. Symptoms of active TB disease include a productive cough, night sweats, fatigue, malaise, fever, and 
unexplained weight loss. Certain immunocompromising medical conditions (e.g., HIV) increase the risk that TB infection will progress to active disease at a faster rate (441).

Overall, the risk borne by DHCP for exposure to a patient with active TB disease is probably low 
(20,21). Only one report exists of TB transmission in a dental office 
(442), and TST conversions among DHCP are also low 

(443,444). However, in certain cases, DHCP or the community served by the dental facility might be at relatively high risk for exposure to TB. 
Surgical masks do not prevent inhalation of M. 
tuberculosis droplet nuclei, and therefore, standard precautions are 
not sufficient to prevent transmission of this organism. Recommendations for expanded precautions to prevent transmission of 

M. tuberculosis and other organisms that can be spread by airborne, droplet, or contact routes have been detailed in 
other guidelines (5,11,20).

TB transmission is controlled through a hierarchy of measures, including administrative controls, environmental 
controls, and personal respiratory protection. The main administrative goals of a TB infection-control program are early detection of a person with active TB disease and prompt isolation from susceptible persons to reduce the risk of transmission. 
Although DHCP are not responsible for diagnosis and treatment of TB, they should be trained to recognize signs and symptoms to 
help with prompt detection. Because potential for transmission of 
M. tuberculosis exists in outpatient settings, dental 
practices should develop a TB control program appropriate for their level of risk 
(20,21).

A community risk assessment should be conducted periodically, and TB infection-control policies for each dental setting should be based on the risk assessment. The policies should include provisions for detection and referral of patients 

who might have undiagnosed active TB; management of patients with active TB who require urgent dental care; and DHCP education, counseling, and TST screening.
DHCP who have contact with patients should have a baseline TST, preferably by using a two-step test at the beginning of employment. The facility's level of TB risk will determine the need for routine follow-up TST.
While taking patients' initial medical histories and at 
periodic updates, dental DHCP should routinely ask all 
patients whether they have a history of TB disease or symptoms indicative of TB.
Patients with a medical history or symptoms indicative of undiagnosed active TB should be referred promptly for medical evaluation to determine possible infectiousness. Such patients should not remain in the dental-care facility any longer than required to evaluate their dental condition and arrange a referral. While in the dental health-care facility, the patient should be isolated from other patients and DHCP, wear a surgical mask when not being evaluated, or be instructed to cover 
their mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing.

Elective dental treatment should be deferred until a physician confirms that a patient does not have infectious TB, or if the patient is diagnosed with active TB disease, until confirmed the patient is no longer infectious.
If urgent dental care is provided for a patient who has, or is suspected of having active TB disease, the care should 

be provided in a facility (e.g., hospital) that provides airborne infection isolation (i.e., using such engineering controls as TB isolation rooms, negatively pressured relative to the corridors, with air either exhausted to the outside or HEPA-filtered if recirculation is necessary). Standard surgical face masks do not protect against TB transmission; DHCP should 
use respiratory protection (e.g., fit-tested, disposable N-95 respirators).

Settings that do not require use of respiratory protection because they do not treat active TB patients and do not perform cough-inducing procedures on potential active TB patients do not need to develop a written respiratory 
protection program.
Any DHCP with a persistent cough (i.e., lasting >3 weeks), especially in the presence of other signs or 
symptoms compatible with active TB (e.g., weight loss, night sweats, 
fatigue, bloody sputum, anorexia, or fever), should be 
evaluated 
promptly. The DHCP should not return to the workplace until a diagnosis of TB has been excluded or the DHCP is 
on therapy and a physician has determined that the DHCP is noninfectious.

Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease and Other Prion Diseases

 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) belongs to a group of rapidly progressive, invariably fatal, degenerative 
neurological disorders, transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) that affect both humans and animals and are thought to be caused by infection with an unusual pathogen called a prion. Prions are isoforms of a normal protein, capable of 
self-propagation although they lack nucleic acid. Prion diseases have an incubation period of years and are usually fatal within 1 year of diagnosis.

Among humans, TSEs include CJD, Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker syndrome, fatal familial insomnia, kuru, and 
variant CJD (vCJD). Occurring in sporadic, familial, and acquired (i.e., iatrogenic) forms, CJD has an annual incidence in the 
United States and other countries of approximately 1 case/million population 
(445--448). In approximately 85% of affected 
patients, CJD occurs as a sporadic disease with no recognizable pattern of transmission. A smaller proportion of patients 
(5%--15%) experience familial CJD because of inherited mutations of the prion protein gene 
(448).

vCJD is distinguishable clinically and neuropathologically from classic CJD, and strong epidemiologic and 
laboratory evidence indicates a causal relationship with bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), a progressive neurological disorder 
of cattle commonly known as mad cow disease 
(449--451). vCJD, was reported first in the United Kingdom in 1996 

(449) and subsequently in other European countries 
(452). Only one case of vCJD has been reported in the United States, in 
an immigrant from the United Kingdom (453). Compared with CJD patients, those with vCJD are younger (28 years versus 
68 years median age at death), and have a longer duration of illness (13 months versus 4.5 months). Also, vCJD 
patients characteristically exhibit sensory and psychiatric symptoms that are uncommon with CJD. Another difference includes the ease with which the presence of prions is consistently demonstrated in lymphoreticular tissues (e.g., tonsil) in vCJD patients by immunohistochemistry (454).

CJD and vCJD are transmissible diseases, but not through the air or casual contact. All known cases of iatrogenic CJD 
have resulted from exposure to infected central nervous tissue (e.g., brain and dura mater), pituitary, or eye tissue. Studies in experimental animals have determined that other tissues have low or no detectable infectivity 

(243,455,456). Limited experimental studies have demonstrated that scrapie (a TSE in sheep) can be transmitted to healthy hamsters and mice by exposing oral tissues to infectious homogenate 
(457,458). These animal models and experimental designs might not be 
directly applicable to human transmission and clinical dentistry, but they indicate a theoretical risk of transmitting prion 
diseases through perioral exposures.

According to published reports, iatrogenic transmission of CJD has occurred in humans under three circumstances: after 
use of contaminated electroencephalography depth electrodes and neurosurgical equipment 
(459); after use of extracted pituitary hormones 

(460,461); and after implant of contaminated corneal (462) and dura mater grafts (463,464) 
from humans. The equipment-related cases occurred before the routine implementation of sterilization procedures used in health-care facilities.

Case-control studies have found no evidence that dental procedures increase the risk of iatrogenic transmission of TSEs among humans. In these studies, CJD transmission was not associated with dental procedures (e.g., root canals or extractions), with convincing evidence of prion detection in human blood, saliva, or oral tissues, or with DHCP becoming 
occupationally infected with CJD (465--467). In 2000, prions were not found in the dental pulps of eight patients with neuropathologically confirmed sporadic CJD by using electrophoresis and a Western blot technique 

(468).

Prions exhibit unusual resistance to conventional chemical and physical decontamination procedures. Considering this resistance and the invariably fatal outcome of CJD, procedures for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments 
potentially contaminated with the CJD prion have been controversial for years. Scientific data indicate the risk, if any, of sporadic CJD transmission during dental and oral surgical procedures is low to nil. Until additional information exists regarding 
the transmissibility of CJD or vCJD, special precautions in addition to standard precautions might be indicated when 
treating known CJD or vCJD patients; the following list of precautions is provided for consideration without 
recommendation (243,249,277,469):

Use single-use disposable items and equipment whenever possible.
Consider items difficult to clean (e.g., endodontic files, broaches, and carbide and diamond burs) as single-use disposables and discard after one use.
To minimize drying of tissues and body fluids on a 

device, keep the instrument moist until cleaned and decontaminated.
Clean instruments thoroughly and steam-autoclave at 134ºC for 18 minutes. This is the least stringent of sterilization methods offered by the World Health Organization. The complete list 

(469) is available at 
http://www.who.int/emc-documents/tse/whocdscsraph2003c.html.
Do not use flash sterilization for processing instruments or devices.

 Potential infectivity of oral tissues in CJD or vCJD patients is an unresolved concern. CDC maintains an active 
surveillance program on CJD. Additional information and resources are available at 
 http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/cjd/cjd.htm. 
Program Evaluation

 The goal of a dental infection-control program is to provide a safe working environment that will reduce the risk of health-care--associated infections among patients and occupational exposures among DHCP. Medical errors are caused by 
faulty systems, processes, and conditions that lead persons to make mistakes or fail to prevent errors being made by others (470). Effective program evaluation is a systematic way to ensure procedures are useful, feasible, ethical, and accurate. Program evaluation is an essential organizational practice; however, such evaluation is not practiced consistently across program areas, nor is it sufficiently well-integrated into the day-to-day management of the majority of programs 
(471).

A successful infection-control program depends on developing standard operating procedures, evaluating practices, 

routinely documenting adverse outcomes (e.g., occupational exposures to blood) and work-related illnesses in DHCP, and 
monitoring health-care--associated infections in patients. Strategies and tools to evaluate the infection-control program can include 
periodic observational assessments, checklists to document procedures, and routine review of occupational exposures to 
bloodborne pathogens. Evaluation offers an opportunity to improve the 
effectiveness of both the infection-control program and 
dental-practice protocols. If deficiencies or problems in the implementation of infection-control procedures are identified, further evaluation 
is needed to eliminate the problems. Examples of infection-control program evaluation activities are 
provided (Table 5).

Infection-Control Research Considerations

 Although the number of published studies concerning dental infection control has increased in recent years, 
questions regarding infection-control practices and their effectiveness remain unanswered. Multiple concerns were identified by 
the working group for this report, as well as by others during the public comment 
period (Box. This list is not exhaustive and does not represent a CDC research agenda, but rather is an effort to identify certain concerns, stimulate discussion, and provide direction for determining future action by clinical, basic science, and epidemiologic investigators, as well as health 
and professional organizations, clinicians, and policy makers.

Recommendations

 Each recommendation is categorized on the basis of existing scientific data, theoretical rationale, and applicability. 

Rankings are based on the system used by CDC and the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC) 
to categorize recommendations:

Category IA. Strongly recommended for implementation and strongly supported by well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.

Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by experimental, clinical, or epidemiologic 
studies and a strong theoretical rationale.

Category IC. Required for implementation as mandated by federal or state regulation or standard. When IC is used, 
a second rating can be included to provide the basis of existing scientific data, theoretical rationale, and applicability. Because 

of state differences, the reader should not assume that the 
absence of a IC implies the absence of state regulations.

Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or epidemiologic studies or a theoretical rationale.

Unresolved issue. No recommendation. Insufficient evidence or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.

 I. Personnel Health Elements of an Infection-Control Program 

 A. General Recommendations

 1. Develop a written health program for DHCP that includes policies, procedures, and guidelines for education 
and training; immunizations; exposure prevention and postexposure management; medical conditions, 
work-related illness, and associated work restrictions; contact dermatitis and latex hypersensitivity; and maintenance of records, data management, and confidentiality (IB) 
(5,16--18,22). 

 2. Establish referral arrangements with qualified health-care professionals to ensure prompt and 
appropriate provision of preventive services, occupationally 

related medical services, and postexposure management with medical follow-up (IB, IC) (5,13,19,22).

 B. Education and Training

 1. Provide DHCP 1) on initial employment, 2) 
when new tasks or procedures affect the employee's 
occupational exposure, and 3) at a minimum, annually, with education and training regarding occupational exposure to potentially infectious agents and infection-control procedures/protocols appropriate for and specific to 

their assigned duties (IB, IC) (5,11,13, 14,16,19,22).

 2. Provide educational information appropriate in content and vocabulary to the educational level, literacy, 
and language of DHCP (IB, IC) (5,13).

 C. Immunization Programs

 1. Develop a written comprehensive policy regarding immunizing DHCP, including a list of all required 
and recommended immunizations (IB) (5,17,18).

 2. Refer DHCP to a prearranged qualified health-care professional or to their own health-care professional to 
receive all appropriate immunizations based on the latest recommendations as well as their medical history and risk for occupational exposure (IB) (5,17).

 D. Exposure Prevention and Postexposure Management

 1. Develop a comprehensive postexposure management and medical follow-up program (IB, IC) 
(5,13,14,19).

 a. Include policies and procedures for prompt reporting, evaluation, counseling, treatment, and medical 
follow-up of occupational exposures. 

 b. Establish mechanisms for referral to a qualified health-care professional for medical evaluation and follow-up.

 c. Conduct a baseline TST, preferably by using 

a two-step test, for all DHCP who might have contact 
with persons with suspected or confirmed infectious TB, regardless of the risk classification of the setting (IB) (20).

 E. Medical Conditions, Work-Related Illness, and Work Restrictions

 1. Develop and have readily available to all DHCP comprehensive written policies regarding work restriction 
and exclusion that include a statement of authority defining who can implement such policies (IB) 
(5,22).

 2. Develop policies for work restriction and exclusion that encourage DHCP to seek appropriate preventive 
and curative care and report their illnesses, medical conditions, or treatments that can render them more 
susceptible to opportunistic infection or exposures; do not penalize DHCP with loss of wages, benefits, or job status (IB) (5,22).

 3. Develop policies and procedures for evaluation, diagnosis, and management of DHCP with suspected or 
known occupational contact dermatitis (IB) 
(32). 

 4. Seek definitive diagnosis by a qualified health-care professional for any DHCP with suspected latex allergy 
to carefully determine its specific etiology and appropriate treatment as well as work restrictions 
and accommodations (IB) (32).

 F. Records Maintenance, Data Management, and Confidentiality

 1. Establish and maintain confidential medical records (e.g., immunization records and documentation of 
tests received as a result of occupational exposure) for all DHCP (IB, IC) 
(5,13). 

 2. Ensure that the practice complies with all applicable federal, state, and local laws regarding medical 
recordkeeping and confidentiality (IC) 
(13,34).

 II. Preventing Transmission of Bloodborne Pathogens 

 A. HBV Vaccination

 1. Offer the HBV vaccination series to all DHCP with potential occupational exposure to blood or other 
potentially infectious material (IA, IC) 
(2,13,14,19). 

 2. Always follow U.S. Public Health Service/CDC recommendations for hepatitis B vaccination, serologic 
testing, follow-up, and booster dosing (IA, IC) 
(13,14,19).

 3. Test DHCP for anti-HBs 1--2 months after completion of the 3-dose vaccination series (IA, IC) 
(14,19). 

 4. DHCP should complete a second 3-dose vaccine series or be evaluated to determine if they are HBsAg-positive 
if no antibody response occurs to the primary vaccine series (IA, IC) 
(14,19). 

 5. Retest for anti-HBs at the completion of the second vaccine series. If no response to the second 3-dose 
series occurs, nonresponders should be tested for HBsAg (IC) 
(14,19). 

 6. Counsel nonresponders to vaccination who are HBsAg-negative regarding their susceptibility to HBV 
infection and precautions to take (IA, IC) 
(14,19).

 7. Provide employees appropriate education regarding the risks of HBV transmission and the availability of 
the vaccine. Employees who decline the vaccination should sign a declination form to be kept on file with 
the employer (IC) (13).

 B. Preventing Exposures to Blood and OPIM

 1. General recommendations

 a. Use standard precautions (OSHA's bloodborne pathogen standard retains the term universal precautions) 
for all patient encounters (IA, IC) 
(11,13,19,53). 

 b. Consider sharp items (e.g., needles, scalers, burs, lab knives, and wires) that are contaminated with 
patient blood and saliva as potentially infective and establish engineering controls and work practices to 

prevent injuries (IB, IC) (6,13,113). 

 c. Implement a written, comprehensive program designed to minimize and manage DHCP exposures to 
blood and body fluids (IB, IC). 
(13,14,19,97).

 2. Engineering and work-practice controls

 a. Identify, evaluate, and select devices with 

engineered safety features at least annually and as they 
become available on the market (e.g., safer anesthetic syringes, blunt suture needle, retractable scalpel, or needleless IV systems) (IC) (13,97,110--112).

 b. Place used disposable syringes and needles, scalpel blades, and other sharp items in 
appropriate puncture-resistant containers located as close as feasible to the area in which the items are used (IA, IC) (2,7,13,19,113, 115).

 c. Do not recap used needles by using both hands or any other technique that involves directing the point of 
a needle toward any part of the body. Do not bend, break, or 
remove needles before disposal (IA, IC) 
(2,7,8,13,97,113).

 d. Use either a one-handed scoop technique or a mechanical device designed for holding the needle cap 
when recapping needles (e.g., between multiple injections and before 
removing from a nondisposable aspirating syringe) (IA, IC) 
(2,7,8,13,14,113).

 3. Postexposure management and prophylaxis

 a. Follow CDC recommendations after percutaneous, mucous membrane, or nonintact skin exposure to 
blood or other potentially infectious material (IA, IC) 
(13,14,19).

 III. Hand Hygiene 

 A. General Considerations

 1. Perform hand hygiene with either a nonantimicrobial or antimicrobial soap and water when hands are 

visibly dirty or contaminated with blood or other potentially infectious material. If hands are not visibly soiled, an alcohol-based hand rub can also be used. Follow the manufacturer's instructions (IA) 
(123). 

 2. Indications for hand hygiene include

 a. when hands are visibly soiled (IA, IC);

 b. after barehanded touching of inanimate objects 
likely to be contaminated by blood, saliva, or respiratory secretions

 (IA, IC); 

 c. before and after treating each patient (IB); 

 d. before donning gloves (IB); and 

 e. immediately after removing gloves (IB, IC) 
(7--9,11,13,113,120--123,125,126,138).

 3. For oral surgical procedures, perform surgical hand antisepsis before donning sterile surgeon's gloves. Follow 
the manufacturer's instructions by using either an antimicrobial soap and water, or soap and water followed by 
drying hands and application of an alcohol-based surgical hand-scrub product with persistent activity (IB) (121--123,127--133,144,145).

 4. Store liquid hand-care products in either disposable closed containers or closed containers that can be washed 
and dried before refilling. Do not add soap or lotion to (i.e., top off) a partially empty dispenser 
(IA) (9,120,122,149,150).

 B. Special Considerations for Hand Hygiene and Glove Use

 1. Use hand lotions to prevent skin dryness associated with handwashing (IA) 
(153,154).

 2. Consider the compatibility of lotion and antiseptic products and the effect of petroleum or other oil 
emollients on the integrity of gloves during product selection and glove use (IB) 
(2,14,122,155). 

 3. Keep fingernails short with smooth, filed edges to allow thorough cleaning and prevent glove tears 
(II) (122,123,156). 

 4. Do not wear artificial fingernails or extenders when having direct contact with patients at high risk (e.g., those 
in intensive care units or operating rooms) (IA) 
(123,157--160). 

 5. Use of artificial fingernails is usually not recommended (II) 
(157--160). 

 6. Do not wear hand or nail jewelry if it makes donning gloves more difficult or compromises the fit and 
integrity of the glove (II) (123,142, 143).

 IV. PPE

 A. Masks, Protective Eyewear, and Face Shields

 1. Wear a surgical mask and eye protection with solid side shields or a face shield to protect 
mucous membranes of the eyes, nose, and mouth during procedures likely to generate splashing or spattering of blood or other body fluids (IB, IC) (1,2,7,8,11,13,137).

 2. Change masks between patients or during patient 
treatment if the mask becomes wet (IB) (2).

 3. Clean with soap and water, or if visibly soiled, clean and disinfect reusable facial protective equipment 
(e.g., clinician and patient protective eyewear or face shields) between patients (II) 
(2).

 B. Protective Clothing

 1. Wear protective clothing (e.g., reusable or disposable gown, laboratory coat, or uniform) that covers 
personal clothing and skin (e.g., forearms) likely to be soiled with blood, saliva, or OPIM (IB, IC) 
(7,8,11,13,137).

 2. Change protective clothing if visibly soiled 
(134); change immediately or as soon as feasible if penetrated 

by blood or other potentially infectious fluids (IB, IC) 
(13). 

 3. Remove barrier protection, including gloves, mask, eyewear, and gown before departing work area (e.g., 
dental patient care, instrument processing, or laboratory areas) (IC) 
(13).

 C. Gloves

 1. Wear medical gloves when a potential exists for contacting blood, saliva, OPIM, or mucous membranes (IB, 
IC) (1,2,7,8,13).

 2. Wear a new pair of medical gloves for each 

patient, remove them promptly after use, and wash hands immediately to avoid transfer of microorganisms to other patients or environments (IB) (1,7,8,123).

 3. Remove gloves that are torn, cut, or punctured as soon as feasible and wash hands before regloving (IB, 
IC) (13,210,211). 

 4. Do not wash surgeon's or patient examination gloves before use or wash, disinfect, or sterilize gloves for reuse 
(IB, IC) (13,138,177,212,213).

 5. Ensure that appropriate gloves in the correct size are readily accessible (IC) 
(13). 

 6. Use appropriate gloves (e.g., puncture- and chemical-resistant utility gloves) when cleaning instruments 
and performing housekeeping tasks involving contact with blood or OPIM (IB, IC) 
(7,13,15). 

 7. Consult with glove manufacturers regarding the chemical compatibility of glove material and dental 

materials used (II).

 D. Sterile Surgeon's Gloves and Double Gloving 
During Oral Surgical Procedures

 1. Wear sterile surgeon's gloves when performing oral surgical procedures (IB) 
(2,8,137). 

 2. No recommendation is offered regarding the 

effectiveness of wearing two pairs of gloves to prevent 
disease transmission during oral surgical procedures. The majority of studies among HCP and DHCP 
have demonstrated a lower frequency of inner glove perforation and visible blood on the surgeon's hands when 
double gloves are worn; however, the effectiveness of wearing two pairs of gloves in preventing disease transmission 
has not been demonstrated (Unresolved issue).

 V. Contact Dermatitis and Latex Hypersensitivity 

 A. General Recommendations

 1. Educate DHCP regarding the signs, symptoms, and diagnoses of skin reactions associated with frequent hand 
hygiene and glove use (IB) (5,31,32). 

 2. Screen all patients for latex allergy (e.g., take health history and refer for medical consultation when latex 
allergy is suspected) (IB) (32). 

 3. Ensure a latex-safe environment for patients and DHCP with latex allergy (IB) 
(32). 

 4. Have emergency treatment kits with latex-free products available at all times (II) 
(32).

 VI. Sterilization and Disinfection of Patient-Care Items 

 A. General Recommendations

 1. Use only FDA-cleared medical devices for sterilization and follow the manufacturer's instructions for correct 
use (IB) (248).

 2. Clean and heat-sterilize critical dental instruments before each use (IA) 
(2,137,243,244, 246,249,407).

 3. Clean and heat-sterilize semicritical items before each use (IB) 
(2,249,260,407). 

 4. Allow packages to dry in the sterilizer before they are handled to avoid contamination (IB) 
(247). 

 5. Use of heat-stable semicritical alternatives is 
encouraged (IB) (2). 

 6. Reprocess heat-sensitive critical and semi-critical instruments by using FDA-cleared 

sterilant/high-level disinfectants or an FDA-cleared low-temperature sterilization method (e.g., ethylene oxide). Follow manufacturer's instructions for use of chemical sterilants/high-level disinfectants (IB) 
(243). 

 7. Single-use disposable instruments are acceptable alternatives if they are used only once and disposed of 
correctly (IB, IC) (243,383). 

 8. Do not use liquid chemical sterilants/high-level disinfectants for environmental surface disinfection or as 
holding solutions (IB, IC) (243,245). 

 9. Ensure that noncritical patient-care items are barrier-protected or cleaned, or if visibly soiled, cleaned 
and disinfected after each use with an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant. If visibly contaminated with blood, use an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant with a tuberculocidal claim (i.e., intermediate level) (IB) (2,243,244).

 10. Inform DHCP of all OSHA guidelines for exposure 
to chemical agents used for disinfection and 
sterilization. Using this report, identify areas and tasks that have potential for exposure (IC) 
(15).

 B. Instrument Processing Area

 1. Designate a central processing area. Divide the instrument processing area, physically or, at a minimum, 
spatially, into distinct areas for 1) receiving, cleaning, and decontamination; 

2) preparation and packaging; 3) sterilization; and 4) storage. Do not store instruments in an area where contaminated instruments are held or cleaned (II) (173,247,248).

 2. Train DHCP to employ work practices that prevent contamination of clean areas (II).

 C. Receiving, Cleaning, and Decontamination Work Area

 1. Minimize handling of loose contaminated instruments 
during transport to the instrument processing area. 
Use work-practice controls (e.g., carry instruments in a covered container) to minimize exposure potential (II). Clean all visible blood and other contamination from dental instruments and devices before sterilization or disinfection procedures (IA) (243,249--252).

 2. Use automated cleaning equipment (e.g., ultrasonic cleaner or washer-disinfector) to remove debris to 
improve cleaning effectiveness and decrease worker exposure to blood (IB) 
(2,253).

 3. Use work-practice controls that minimize contact with sharp instruments if manual cleaning is necessary 
(e.g., long-handled brush) (IC) (14). 

 4. Wear puncture- and chemical-resistant/heavy-duty utility gloves for instrument cleaning and 
decontamination procedures (IB) (7). 

 5. Wear appropriate PPE (e.g., mask, protective eyewear, and gown) when splashing or spraying is 
anticipated during cleaning (IC) (13).

 D. Preparation and Packaging

 1. Use an internal chemical indicator in each package. If the internal indicator cannot be seen from outside 
the package, also use an external indicator (II) 
(243,254,257).

2. Use a container system or wrapping compatible with the type of sterilization process used and that has 
received FDA clearance (IB) (243,247, 256).

3. Before sterilization of critical and semicritical instruments, inspect instruments for cleanliness, then wrap or 
place them in containers designed to maintain sterility during storage (e.g., cassettes and organizing trays) 
(IA) (2,247,255,256).

 E. Sterilization of Unwrapped Instruments

 1. Clean and dry instruments before the unwrapped sterilization cycle (IB) 
(248). 

 2. Use mechanical and chemical indicators for each unwrapped sterilization cycle (i.e., place an 
internal chemical indicator among the instruments or items to be sterilized) (IB) 
(243,258).

 3. Allow unwrapped instruments to dry and cool in the sterilizer before they are handled to avoid 
contamination and thermal injury (II) (260). 

 4. Semicritical instruments that will be used 
immediately or within a short time can be sterilized unwrapped on 
a tray or in a container system, provided that the instruments are handled aseptically during removal from the sterilizer and transport to the point of use (II).

 5. Critical instruments intended for immediate 
reuse can be sterilized unwrapped if the instruments are 
maintained sterile during removal from the sterilizer and transport to the point of use (e.g., transported in a sterile covered container) (IB) (258).

 6. Do not sterilize implantable devices unwrapped (IB) 
(243,247). 

 7. Do not store critical instruments unwrapped (IB) 
(248).

 F. Sterilization Monitoring

 1. Use mechanical, chemical, and biological monitors according to the manufacturer's instructions to ensure 
the effectiveness of the sterilization process (IB) 
(248,278,279). 

 2. Monitor each load with mechanical (e.g., time, temperature, and pressure) and chemical indicators 
(II) (243,248). 

 3. Place a chemical indicator on the inside of each package. If the internal indicator is not visible from the 
outside, also place an exterior chemical indicator on the package (II) 
(243,254,257). 

 4. Place items/packages correctly and loosely into the sterilizer so as not to impede penetration of the sterilant 
(IB) (243). 

 5. Do not use instrument packs if mechanical or chemical indicators indicate inadequate processing 
(IB) (243,247,248). 

 6. Monitor sterilizers at least weekly by using a biological indicator with a matching control (i.e., 
biological indicator and control from same lot number) (IB) 
(2,9,243,247,278,279). 

 7. Use a biological indicator for every sterilizer load that contains an implantable device. Verify 
results before using the implantable device, whenever possible (IB) 
(243,248). 

 8. The following are recommended in the case of a positive spore test:

 a. Remove the sterilizer from service and review 

sterilization procedures (e.g., work practices and use 
of mechanical and chemical indicators) to determine whether operator error could be responsible (II) (8).

 b. Retest the sterilizer by using biological, 

mechanical, and chemical indicators after correcting any identified procedural problems (II).

 c. If the repeat spore test is negative, and 
mechanical and chemical indicators are within normal limits, put 
the sterilizer back in service (II) (9,243).

 9. The following are recommended if the repeat spore test is positive:

 a. Do not use the sterilizer until it has been inspected or repaired or the exact reason for the positive test 
has been determined (II) (9,243). 

 b. Recall, to the extent possible, and reprocess all items processed since the last negative spore test 
(II) (9,243,283). 

 c. Before placing the sterilizer back in service, rechallenge the sterilizer with biological 
indicator tests in three consecutive empty chamber sterilization cycles after the cause of the sterilizer failure has been determined and corrected (II) (9,243,283).

 10. Maintain sterilization records (i.e., mechanical, chemical, and biological) in compliance with state and 
local regulations (IB) (243).

 G. Storage Area for Sterilized Items and Clean 
Dental Supplies

 1. Implement practices on the basis of date- or event-related shelf-life for storage of wrapped, sterilized 
instruments and devices (IB) (243, 284). 

 2. Even for event-related packaging, at a minimum, place the date of sterilization, and if multiple sterilizers are 
used in the facility, the sterilizer used, on the outside of the packaging material to facilitate the retrieval of 
processed items in the event of a sterilization failure (IB) 
(243,247).

 3. Examine wrapped packages of sterilized instruments before opening them to ensure the barrier wrap has not 
been compromised during storage (II) 
(243,284). 

 4. Reclean, repack, and resterilize any instrument package that has been compromised (II).

 5. Store sterile items and dental supplies in covered or closed cabinets, if possible (II) 
(285).

 VII. Environmental Infection Control 

 A. General Recommendations

 1. Follow the manufacturers' instructions for correct use of cleaning and EPA-registered hospital 
disinfecting products (IB, IC) (243--245). 

 2. Do not use liquid chemical sterilants/high-level disinfectants for disinfection of environmental surfaces 
(clinical contact or housekeeping) (IB, IC) 
(243--245).

 3. Use PPE, as appropriate, when cleaning and disinfecting environmental surfaces. Such equipment might 
include gloves (e.g., puncture- and chemical-resistant utility), protective clothing (e.g., gown, jacket, or lab coat), 
and protective eyewear/face shield, and mask (IC) 
(13,15).

 B. Clinical Contact Surfaces

 1. Use surface barriers to protect clinical contact surfaces, particularly those that are difficult to clean (e.g., 
switches on dental chairs) and change surface barriers between patients (II) 
(1,2,260, 288).

 2. Clean and disinfect clinical contact surfaces that are not barrier-protected, by using an 
EPA-registered hospital disinfectant with a low- (i.e., HIV and HBV label claims) to intermediate-level (i.e., tuberculocidal claim) activity after each patient. Use an intermediate-level disinfectant if visibly contaminated with blood (IB) 
(2,243,244).

 C. Housekeeping Surfaces

 1. Clean housekeeping surfaces (e.g., floors, walls, and sinks) with a detergent and water or an 
EPA-registered hospital disinfectant/detergent on a routine basis, depending on the nature of the surface and type and degree 
of contamination, and as appropriate, based on the location in the facility, and when visibly soiled (IB) 
(243,244). 

 2. Clean mops and cloths after use and allow to dry before reuse; or use single-use, disposable mop heads or 
cloths (II) (243,244). 

 3. Prepare fresh cleaning or EPA-registered disinfecting solutions daily and as instructed by the manufacturer. 
(II) (243,244). 

 4. Clean walls, blinds, and window curtains in 

patient-care areas when they are visibly dusty or soiled (II) (9,244).

 D. Spills of Blood and Body Substances

 1. Clean spills of blood or OPIM and decontaminate surface with an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant with 
low- (i.e., HBV and HIV label claims) to intermediate-level (i.e., tuberculocidal claim) activity, depending on size of spill and surface porosity (IB, IC) 
(13,113).

 E. Carpet and Cloth Furnishings

 1. Avoid using carpeting and cloth-upholstered furnishings in dental operatories, laboratories, and 
instrument processing areas (II) 
(9,293--295).

 F. Regulated Medical Waste

 1. General Recommendations

a. Develop a medical waste management program. Disposal of regulated medical waste must follow 
federal, state, and local regulations (IC) 
(13,301). 

 b. Ensure that DHCP who handle and dispose of regulated medical waste are trained in 
appropriate handling and disposal methods and informed of the possible health and safety hazards (IC) (13).

2. Management of Regulated Medical Waste in Dental Health-Care Facilities

a. Use a color-coded or labeled container that prevents leakage (e.g., biohazard bag) to contain 
nonsharp regulated medical waste (IC) (13). 

 b. Place sharp items (e.g., needles, scalpel blades, orthodontic bands, broken metal 
instruments, and burs) in an appropriate sharps container (e.g., puncture resistant, color-coded, and leakproof). Close container immediately before removal or replacement to prevent spillage or protrusion of contents during 
handling, storage, transport, or shipping (IC) 
(2,8,13,113,115).

 c. Pour blood, suctioned fluids or other liquid waste carefully into a drain connected to a sanitary sewer 
system, if local sewage discharge requirements are met and the state has declared this an acceptable method 
of disposal. Wear appropriate PPE while performing this task (IC) 
(7,9,13).

 VIII. Dental Unit Waterlines, Biofilm, and Water Quality 

 A. General Recommendations

 1. Use water that meets EPA regulatory standards for drinking water (i.e., 
<500 CFU/mL of heterotrophic water bacteria) for routine dental treatment output water (IB, IC) (341,342).

 2. Consult with the dental unit manufacturer for appropriate methods and equipment to maintain 
the recommended quality of dental water (II) 
(339). 

 3. Follow recommendations for monitoring water quality provided by the manufacturer of the unit or 
waterline treatment product (II).

 4. Discharge water and air for a minimum of 20--30 seconds after each patient, from any device connected to 
the dental water system that enters the patient's mouth (e.g., handpieces, ultrasonic scalers, and air/water 
syringes) (II) (2,311,344). 

 5. Consult with the dental unit manufacturer on the need for periodic maintenance of antiretraction 
mechanisms (IB) (2,311).

 B. Boil-Water Advisories

 1. The following apply while a boil-water advisory is in effect:

a. Do not deliver water from the public water system to the patient through the dental operative unit, 
ultrasonic scaler, or other dental equipment that uses the public water system (IB, IC) 
(341,342,346,349,350).

 b. Do not use water from the public water system for dental treatment, patient rinsing, or handwashing (IB, 
IC) (341,342,346,349, 350).

 c. For handwashing, use antimicrobial-containing 
products that do not require water for use (e.g., 
alcohol-based hand rubs). If hands are visibly contaminated, use bottled water, if available, and soap for handwashing or an antiseptic towelette (IB, IC) (13,122).

2. The following apply when the boil-water advisory 
is cancelled:

a. Follow guidance given by the local water utility regarding adequate flushing of waterlines. If no guidance 
is provided, flush dental waterlines and faucets for 1--5 minutes before using for patient care (IC) 
(244,346, 351,352). 

 b. Disinfect dental waterlines as recommended by the dental unit manufacturer (II).

 IX. Special Considerations 

 A. Dental Handpieces and Other Devices Attached to Air and Waterlines

 1. Clean and heat-sterilize handpieces and other intraoral instruments that can be removed from the air 
and waterlines of dental units between patients (IB, IC) 
(2,246,275,356,357,360,407). 

 2. Follow the manufacturer's instructions for cleaning, lubrication, and sterilization of handpieces and 
other intraoral instruments that can be removed from the air and waterlines of dental units (IB) 
(361--363). 

 3. Do not surface-disinfect, use liquid chemical sterilants, or ethylene oxide on handpieces and other 
intraoral instruments that can be removed from the air and waterlines of dental units (IC) 
(2,246,250,275). 

 4. Do not advise patients to close their lips tightly around the tip of the saliva ejector to evacuate oral fluids 
(II) (364--366).

 B. Dental Radiology

 1. Wear gloves when exposing radiographs and handling contaminated film packets. Use other PPE (e.g., 

protective eyewear, mask, and gown) as appropriate if spattering of blood or other body fluids is likely (IA, IC) (11,13).

 2. Use heat-tolerant or disposable intraoral devices whenever possible (e.g., film-holding and positioning 
devices). Clean and heat-sterilize heat-tolerant devices between patients. At a minimum, high-level disinfect semicritical heat-sensitive devices, according to manufacturer's instructions (IB) 
(243). 

 3. Transport and handle exposed radiographs in an aseptic manner to prevent contamination 
of developing equipment (II). 

 4. The following apply for digital radiography 
sensors:

a. Use FDA-cleared barriers (IB) 
(243). 

 b. Clean and heat-sterilize, or high-level disinfect, between patients, barrier-protected semicritical items. If 
the item cannot tolerate these procedures then, at a minimum, protect with an FDA-cleared barrier and clean 

and disinfect with an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant with intermediate-level (i.e., tuberculocidal claim) activity, between patients. Consult with the manufacturer for methods of disinfection and sterilization of digital radiology sensors and for protection of associated computer hardware (IB) 
(243).

 C. Aseptic Technique for Parenteral Medications

 1. Do not administer medication from a syringe to multiple patients, even if the needle on the 
syringe is changed (IA) (378). 2. Use single-dose vials for parenteral medications when possible (II) 
(376,377). 

 3. Do not combine the leftover contents of single-use vials for later use (IA) 
(376,377). 

 4. The following apply if multidose vials are used:

 a. Cleanse the access diaphragm with 70% alcohol 
before inserting a device into the vial (IA) 
(380,381). 

 b. Use a sterile device to access a multiple-dose vial and avoid touching the access diaphragm. Both the needle 
and syringe used to access the multidose vial should be sterile. Do not reuse a syringe even if the needle is 
changed (IA) (380,381). 

 c. Keep multidose vials away from the immediate patient treatment area to prevent inadvertent 
contamination by spray or spatter (II). 

 d. Discard the multidose vial if sterility is compromised (IA) 
(380,381).

 5. Use fluid infusion and administration sets (i.e., IV bags, tubings and connections) for one 
patient only and dispose of appropriately (IB) 
(378).

 D. Single-Use (Disposable) Devices

 1. Use single-use devices for one patient only and dispose of them appropriately (IC) 
(383).

 E. Preprocedural Mouth Rinses

 1. No recommendation is offered regarding use of preprocedural antimicrobial mouth rinses to prevent 
clinical infections among DHCP or patients. Although studies have demonstrated that a preprocedural 
antimicrobial rinse (e.g., chlorhexidine gluconate, essential oils, or povidone-iodine) can reduce the level of oral microorganisms in aerosols and spatter generated during routine dental procedures and can 
decrease the number of microorganisms introduced in the patient's bloodstream during invasive dental procedures (391--399), the 

scientific evidence is inconclusive that using these rinses prevents clinical infections among DHCP or 
patients (see discussion, Preprocedural Mouth Rinses) (Unresolved issue).

 F. Oral Surgical Procedures

 1. The following apply when performing oral surgical procedures:

a. Perform surgical hand antisepsis by using an antimicrobial product (e.g., antimicrobial soap and water, 
or soap and water followed by alcohol-based hand scrub with persistent activity) before donning sterile 
surgeon's gloves (IB) (127--132,137). b. Use sterile surgeon's gloves (IB) 
(2,7,121, 123,137).

 c. Use sterile saline or sterile water as a coolant/irrigatant when performing oral surgical procedures. Use 
devices specifically designed for delivering sterile irrigating fluids (e.g., bulb syringe, single-use disposable products, and sterilizable tubing) (IB) 
(2,121).

 G. Handling of Biopsy Specimens

 1. During transport, place biopsy specimens in a sturdy, leakproof container labeled with the biohazard symbol 
(IC) (2,13,14). 

 2. If a biopsy specimen container is visibly contaminated, clean and disinfect the outside of a container or place it 
in an impervious bag labeled with the biohazard symbol, (IC) 
(2,13).

 H. Handling of Extracted Teeth

 1. Dispose of extracted teeth as regulated medical waste unless returned to the patient (IC) 
(13,14). 

 2. Do not dispose of extracted teeth containing amalgam in regulated medical waste intended for incineration (II).

 3. Clean and place extracted teeth in a leakproof container, labeled with a biohazard symbol, and 
maintain hydration for transport to educational institutions or a dental laboratory (IC) 
(13,14). 

 4. Heat-sterilize teeth that do not contain amalgam before they are used for educational purposes 
(IB) (403,405,406).

 I. Dental Laboratory

 1. Use PPE when handling items received in the laboratory until they have been decontaminated (IA, 
IC) (2,7,11,13,113). 2. Before they are handled in the laboratory, clean, disinfect, and rinse all dental prostheses and 

prosthodontic materials (e.g., impressions, bite registrations, occlusal rims, and extracted teeth) by using an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant having at least an intermediate-level (i.e., tuberculocidal claim) activity (IB) (2,249,252,407).

 3. Consult with manufacturers regarding the stability of specific materials (e.g., impression 
materials) relative to disinfection procedures (II). 

 4. Include specific information regarding disinfection techniques used (e.g., solution used and duration), 
when laboratory cases are sent off-site and on their return (II) 
(2,407,409). 

 5. Clean and heat-sterilize heat-tolerant items used in the mouth (e.g., metal impression trays and face-bow 
forks) (IB) (2,407). 

 6. Follow manufacturers' instructions for cleaning and sterilizing or disinfecting items that become 

contaminated but do not normally contact the patient (e.g., burs, polishing points, rag wheels, articulators, case pans, and lathes). If manufacturer instructions are unavailable, clean and heat-sterilize heat-tolerant items or clean 
and disinfect with an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant with low- (HIV, HBV effectiveness claim) to intermediate-level (tuberculocidal claim) activity, depending on the degree of contamination (II).

 J. Laser/Electrosurgery Plumes/Surgical Smoke

 1. No recommendation is offered regarding practices to reduce DHCP exposure to laser plumes/surgical 
smoke when using lasers in dental practice. Practices to reduce HCP exposure to laser plumes/surgical smoke have been suggested, including use of a) standard precautions (e.g., high-filtration surgical masks and possibly full 
face shields) (437); b) central room suction units with in-line filters to collect particulate matter from minimal plumes; and c) dedicated mechanical smoke exhaust systems with a high-efficiency filter to remove substantial amounts of laser-plume particles. The effect of the exposure (e.g., disease transmission or adverse respiratory 

effects) on DHCP from dental applications of lasers has not been adequately evaluated (see previous 
discussion, Laser/Electrosurgery Plumes or Surgical Smoke) 
(Unresolved issue).

 K. Mycobacterium tuberculosis

 1. General Recommendations

 a. Educate all DHCP regarding the recognition of signs, symptoms, and transmission of TB (IB) 
(20,21). 

 b. Conduct a baseline TST, preferably by using 

a two-step test, for all DHCP who might have contact 
with persons with suspected or confirmed active TB, regardless of the risk classification of the setting (IB) (20).

 c. Assess each patient for a history of TB as well as symptoms indicative of TB and document on the 
medical history form (IB) (20,21). 

 d. Follow CDC recommendations for 1) 
developing, maintaining, and implementing a written TB 

infection-control plan; 2) managing a patient with suspected or active TB; 3) completing a community risk-assessment to guide employee TSTs and follow-up; and 4) managing DHCP with TB disease (IB) (2,21).

 2. The following apply for patients known or suspected to have active TB:

 a. Evaluate the patient away from other patients and DHCP. When not being evaluated, the patient should wear a surgical mask or be instructed to cover mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing (IB) 
(20,21). 

 b. Defer elective dental treatment until the 
patient is noninfectious (IB) (20,21). 

 c. Refer patients requiring urgent dental treatment to a previously identified facility with TB engineering controls and a respiratory protection program (IB) 
(20,21).

 L. Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) and Other Prion Diseases

 1. No recommendation is offered regarding use of special precautions in addition to standard precautions when treating known CJD or vCJD patients. Potential infectivity of oral tissues in CJD or vCJD patients is 

an unresolved issue. Scientific data indicate the risk, if any, of sporadic CJD transmission during dental and oral surgical procedures is low to nil. Until additional information exists regarding the transmissibility of CJD or vCJD during dental procedures, special precautions in addition to standard precautions might be indicated 
when treating known CJD or vCJD patients; a list of such precautions is provided for consideration 

without recommendation (see Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease and Other Prion Diseases) (Unresolved issue). 

 M. Program Evaluation

 1. Establish routine evaluation of the 
infection-control program, including evaluation of performance indicators, 
at an established frequency (II) (470-471).

Infection-Control Internet Resources

 Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices 

 http://www.cdc.gov/nip/ACIP/default.htm

American Dental Association 

 http://www.ada.org 
American Institute of Architects Academy of Architecture for Health

 http://www.aahaia.org 
American Society of Heating, Refrigeration, Air-conditioning Engineers

 http://www.ashrae.org
Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc.

 http://www.apic.org/resc/guidlist.cfm

 CDC, Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion

 http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/hip 

 CDC, Division of Oral Health, Infection Control

 http://www.cdc.gov/OralHealth/infectioncontrol/index.htm 

 CDC, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report

 http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr
CDC, NIOSH 

 http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/homepage.html

CDC Recommends, Prevention Guidelines System 

 http://www.phppo.cdc.gov/cdcRecommends/AdvSearchV.asp 

 EPA, Antimicrobial Chemicals

 http://www.epa.gov/oppad001/chemregindex.htm 

 FDA 

 http://www.fda.gov

Immunization Action Coalition 

 http://www.immunize.org/acip

 Infectious Diseases Society of America 

 http://www.idsociety.org/PG/toc.htm 

 OSHA, Dentistry, Bloodborne Pathogens

 http://www.osha.gov/SLTC/dentistry/index.html

 http://www.osha.gov/SLTC/bloodbornepathogens/index.html 

 Organization for Safety and Asepsis Procedures

 http://www.osap.org

Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, Inc., Position Papers 

 http://www.shea-online.org/PositionPapers.html 

Acknowledgement

 The Division of Oral Health thanks the working group as well as CDC and other federal and external reviewers for their efforts 
in developing and reviewing drafts of this report and acknowledges that all opinions of the reviewers might not be reflected in all of 
the recommendations.
References 
 1. CDC. Recommended infection-control practices for dentistry. MMWR 1986;35:237--42.

 2. CDC. Recommended infection-control practices for dentistry, 1993. MMWR 1993;42(No. RR-8).

 3. US Census Bureau. Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2001. Washington, DC: US Census Bureau, 2001. Available at 
 http://www.
 census.gov/prod/www/statistical-abstract-02.html.

 4. Health Resources and Services Administration, Bureau of Health Professions. United States health workforce personnel factbook. Rockville, MD: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration, 2000. 

 5. Bolyard EA, Tablan OC, Williams WW, Pearson ML, Shapiro CN, Deitchman SD, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory 
Committee. Guideline for infection control in health care personnel, 1998. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:289--354. 

 6. Greene VW. Microbiological contamination control in hospitals. 1. Perspectives. Hospitals 1969;43:78--88. 

 7. CDC. Perspectives in disease prevention and health promotion update: universal precautions for prevention of transmission of 
human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;38:377--382, 387--8. 

 8. CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to health-care and public-safety workers: 
a response to P.L. 100-607 The Health Omnibus Programs Extension Act of 1988. MMWR 1989;38(suppl No. 6S). 

 9. Garner JS, Favero MS. CDC guideline for handwashing and hospital environmental control, 1985. Infect Control 1986;7:231--43. 

 10. CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in health-care settings. MMWR 1987;36(suppl No. 2S). 

 11. Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for isolation precautions in hospitals. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1996;17:53--80. 

 12. Chiarello LA, Bartley J. Prevention of blood exposure in healthcare personnel. Seminars in Infection Control 2001;1:30--43. 

 13. US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 29 CFR Part 1910.1030. Occupational exposure to 

bloodborne pathogens; needlesticks and other sharps injuries; final rule. Federal Register 2001;66:5317--25. As amended from and includes 29 CFR 
Part 1910.1030. Occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens; final rule. Federal Register 1991;56:64174--82. Available at 
 http://www.osha.gov/SLTC/dentistry/index.html.

 14. US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. OSHA instruction: enforcement procedures for the occupational 
exposure to bloodborne pathogens. Washington, DC: US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 2001; directive no. CPL 
2-2.69. 

 15. US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 29 CFR 1910.1200. Hazard communication. Federal 
Register 1994;59:17479. 

 16. Gershon RR, Karkashian CD, Grosch JW, et al. Hospital safety climate and its relationship with safe work practices and workplace exposure 
incidents. Am J Infect Control 2000;28:211--21. 

 17. CDC. Immunization of health-care workers: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) and the 
Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-18). 

 18. Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology. APIC position paper: immunization. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:52--3.

 19. CDC. Updated U.S. Public Health Service guidelines for the management of occupational exposures to HBV, HCV, and HIV and recommendations 
for postexposure prophylaxis. MMWR 2001;50(No. RR-11).

 20. CDC. Guidelines for preventing the transmission of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis in health-care facilities, 1994. MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-13).

 21. Cleveland JL, Gooch BF, Bolyard EA, Simone PM, Mullan RJ, Marianos DW. TB infection control recommendations from the CDC, 
1994: considerations for dentistry. J Am Dent Assoc 1995;126:593--9. 

 22. Herwaldt LA, Pottinger JM, Carter CD, Barr BA, Miller ED. Exposure workups. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:850--71. 

 23. Nash KD. How infection control procedures are affecting dental practice today. J Am Dent Assoc 1992;123:67--73. 

 24. Berky ZT, Luciano WJ, James WD. Latex glove allergy: a survey of the US Army Dental Corps. JAMA 1992;268:2695--7. 

 25. Bubak ME, Reed CE, Fransway AF, et al. Allergic reactions to latex among health-care workers. Mayo Clin Proc 1992;67:1075--9. 

 26. Fisher AA. Allergic contact reactions in health personnel. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1992;90:729--38. 

 27. Smart ER, Macleod RI, Lawrence CM. Allergic reactions to rubber gloves in dental patients: report of three cases. Br Dent J 1992;172:445--7. 

 28. Yassin MS, Lierl MB, Fischer TJ, O'Brien K, Cross J, Steinmetz C. Latex allergy in hospital employees. Ann Allergy 1994;72:245--9. 

 29. Zaza S, Reeder JM, Charles LE, Jarvis WR. Latex sensitivity among perioperative nurses. AORN J 1994;60:806--12. 

 30. Hunt LW, Fransway AF, Reed CE, et al. An epidemic of occupational allergy to latex involving health care workers. J Occup Environ 
Med 1995;37:1204--9. 

 31. American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs. The dental team and latex hypersensitivity. J Am Dent Assoc 1999;130:257--64. 

 32. CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. NIOSH Alert: preventing allergic reactions to natural rubber latex in the 
workplace. Cincinnati, OH: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health, 1997. 

 33. Terezhalmy GT, Molinari JA. Personal protective equipment and barrier techniques. In: Cottone JA, Terezhalmy GT, Molinari JA, eds. 
Practical infection control in dentisty. 
2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1996:136--145. 

 34. US Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Secretary, Office for Civil Rights. 45 CFR Parts 160 and 164. Standards for privacy 
of individually identifiable health information; final rule. Federal Register 2000;65:82462--829. 

 35. Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Access to medical and exposure records. Washington, DC: US Department of Labor, 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 2001. OSHA publication no. 3110. 

 36. Mast EE, Alter MJ. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection among health-care workers. In: Ellis RW, ed. Hepatitis B vaccines in clinical 
practice. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker, 1993:295--307. 

 37. Beltrami EM, Williams IT, Shapiro CN, Chamberland ME. Risk and management of blood-borne infections in health care workers. Clin 
Microbiol Rev 2000;13:385--407. 

 38. Werner BG, Grady GF. Accidental hepatitis-B-surface-antigen-positive inoculations: use of e antigen to estimate infectivity. Ann Intern 
Med 1982;97:367--9. 

 39. Bond WW, Petersen NJ, Favero MS. Viral hepatitis B: aspects of environmental control. Health Lab Sci 1977;14:235--52. 

 40. Garibaldi RA, Hatch FE, Bisno AL, Hatch MH, Gregg MB. Nonparenteral serum hepatitis: report of an outbreak. JAMA 1972; 220:963--6. 

 41. Rosenberg JL, Jones DP, Lipitz LR, Kirsner JB. Viral hepatitis: an occupational hazard to surgeons. JAMA 1973;223:395--400. 

 42. Callender ME, White YS, Williams R. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health care personnel. Br Med J 1982;284:324--6. 

 43. Chaudhuri AK, Follett EA. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health care personnel [Letter]. Br Med J 1982;284:1408. 

 44. Bond WW, Favero MS, Petersen NJ, Gravelle CR, Ebert JW, Maynard JE. Survival of hepatitis B virus after drying and storage for one week 
[Letter]. Lancet 1981;1:550--1. 

 45. Francis DP, Favero MS, Maynard JE. Transmission of hepatitis B virus [Review]. Semin Liver Dis 1981;1:27--32. 

 46. Favero MS, Maynard JE, Petersen NJ, et al. Hepatitis-B antigen on environmental surfaces [Letter]. Lancet 1973;2:1455. 

 47. Lauer JL, VanDrunen NA, Washburn JW, Balfour HH Jr. Transmission of hepatitis B virus in clinical laboratory areas. J Infect Dis 1979;140:513--6. 

 48. Hennekens CH. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: an outbreak among hospital personnel. JAMA 1973;225:407--8. 

 49. Garibaldi RA, Forrest JN, Bryan JA, Hanson BF, Dismukes WE. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis. JAMA 1973;225:384--9. 

 50. Snydman DR, Bryan JA, Macon EJ, Gregg MB. 
Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: a report of an epidemic with further evidence on mechanisms 
of transmission. Am J Epidemiol 1976;104:563--70. 

 51. Shapiro CN. Occupational risk of infection with hepatitis B and hepatitis C virus. Surg Clin North Am 1995;75:1047--56. 

 52. Cleveland JL, Siew C, Lockwood SA, Gruninger SE, Gooch BF, Shapiro CN. Hepatitis B vaccination and infection among U.S. dentists, 
1983--1992. J Am Dent Assoc 1996;127:1385--90. 

 53. CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to patients during 
exposure-prone invasive procedures. MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-8). 

 54. Chamberland ME. HIV transmission from health care worker to patient: what is the risk [Letter]? Ann Intern Med 1992;116:871--3. 

 55. Robert LM, Chamberland ME, Cleveland JL, et al. Investigation of patients of health care workers infected with HIV: the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention database. Ann Intern Med 1995;122:653--7.

 56. CDC. Investigations of persons treated by HIV-infected health-care workers---United States. MMWR 1993;42:329--331, 337. 

 57. Siew C, Chang SB, Gruninger SE, Verrusio AC, Neidle EA. Self-reported percutaneous injuries in dentists: implications for HBV, HIV, 
transmission risk. J Am Dent Assoc 1992;123:36--44. 

 58. Ahtone J, Goodman RA. Hepatitis B and dental personnel: transmission to patients and prevention issues. J Am Dent Assoc 1983;106:219--22.

 59. Hadler SC, Sorley DL, Acree KH, et al. An outbreak of hepatitis B in a dental practice. Ann Intern Med 1981;95:133--8. 

 60. CDC. Epidemiologic notes and reports: hepatitis B among dental patients---Indiana. MMWR 1985;34:73--5. 

 61. Levin ML, Maddrey WC, Wands JR, Mendeloff AL. Hepatitis B transmission by dentists. JAMA 1974;228:1139--40. 

 62. Rimland D, Parkin WE, Miller GB Jr, Schrack WD. Hepatitis B outbreak traced to an oral surgeon. N Engl J Med 1977;296:953--8. 

 63. Goodwin D, Fannin SL, McCracken BB. An oral surgeon-related hepatitis-B outbreak. California Morbidity 1976;14:1. 

 64. Reingold AL, Kane MA, Murphy BL, Checko P, Francis DP, Maynard JE. Transmission of hepatitis B by an oral surgeon. J Infect Dis 1982; 
145:262--8. 

 65. Goodman RA, Ahtone JL, Finton RJ. Hepatitis B transmission from dental personnel to patients: unfinished business. Ann Intern Med 1982;96:119. 

 66. Shaw FE Jr, Barrett CL, Hamm R, et al. Lethal outbreak of hepatitis B in a dental practice. JAMA 1986;255:3260--4. 

 67. CDC. Epidemiologic notes and reports: outbreak of hepatitis B associated with an oral surgeon---New Hampshire. MMWR 1987;36:132--3.

 68. US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 29 CFR Part 1910.1030. Occupational exposure to 
bloodborne pathogens; final rule. Federal Register 1991;56:64004--182. 

 69. CDC. Hepatitis B virus: a comprehensive strategy for eliminating transmission in the United States through universal childhood 
vaccination: recommendations of the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-13). 

 70. Polish LB, Gallagher M, Fields HA, Hadler SC. Delta hepatitis: molecular biology and clinical and epidemiological features. Clin Microbiol 
Rev 1993;6:211--29. 

 71. Alter MJ. The epidemiology of acute and chronic hepatitis C. Clin Liver Dis 1997;1:559--68. 

 72. Puro V, Petrosillo N, Ippolito G. Risk of hepatitis C seroconversion after occupational exposures in health care workers: Italian Study Group 
on Occupational Risk of HIV and Other Bloodborne Infections. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:273--7. 

 73. Lanphear BP, Linnemann CC Jr, Cannon CG, DeRonde MM, Pendy L, Kerley LM. Hepatitis C virus infection in healthcare workers: risk 
of exposure and infection. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994; 15:745--50. 

 74. Mitsui T, Iwano K, Masuko K, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection in medical personnel after needlestick accident. Hepatology 1992;16: 1109--14. 

 75. Sartori M, La Terra G, Aglietta M, Manzin A, Navino C, Verzetti G. Transmission of hepatitis C via blood splash into conjunctiva. Scand J Infect 
Dis 1993;25:270--1. 

 76. Ippolito G, Puro V, De Carli G. The risk of occupational human immunodeficiency virus in health care workers: Italian Multicenter Study, 
The Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV Infection. Arch Intern Med 1993;153:1451--8. 

 77. Beltrami EM, Kozak A, Williams IT, et al. Transmission of HIV and hepatitis C virus from a nursing home patient to a health care worker. Am J 
Infec Control. 2003; 31:168--75. 

 78. Cooper BW, Krusell A, Tilton RC, Goodwin R, Levitz RE. Seroprevalence of antibodies to hepatitis C virus in high-risk hospital personnel. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1992;13:82--5. 

 79. Panlilio AL, Shapiro CN, Schable CA, et al. Serosurvey of human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C virus infection 

among hospital-based surgeons. Serosurvey Study Group. J Am Coll Surg 1995;180:16--24. 

 80. Polish LB, Tong MJ, Co RL, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Risk factors for hepatitis C virus infection among health care personnel in a community 
hospital. Am J Infect Control 1993;21:196--200. 

 81. Shapiro CN, Tokars JI, Chamberland ME, American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons Serosurvey Study Committee. Use of the hepatitis-B 
vaccine and infection with hepatitis B and C among orthopaedic surgeons. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1996;78:1791--800. 

 82. Gerberding JL. Incidence and prevalence of human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and cytomegalovirus among 
health care personnel at risk for blood exposure: final report from a longitudinal study. J Infect Dis 1994;170:1410--7. 

 83. Klein RS, Freeman K, Taylor PE, Stevens CE. Occupational risk for hepatitis C virus infection among New York City dentists. 
Lancet 1991;338:1539--42. 

 84. Thomas DL, Gruninger SE, Siew C, Joy ED, Quinn TC. Occupational risk of hepatitis C infections among general dentists and oral surgeons 
in North America. Am J Med 1996;100:41--5. 

 85. Cleveland JL, Gooch BF, Shearer BG, Lyerla RL. Risk and prevention of hepatitis C virus infection: implications for dentistry. J Am Dent 
Assoc 1999;130:641--7. 

 86. Gruninger SE, Siew C, Azzolin KL, Meyer DM. Update of hepatitis C infection among dental professionals [Abstract 1825]. J Dent Res 2001;80:264. 

 87. Esteban JI, Gomez J, Martell M, et al. Transmission of hepatitis C virus by a cardiac surgeon. N Engl J Med 1996;334:555--60. 

 88. Duckworth GJ, Heptonstall J, Aitken C. Transmission of hepatitis C virus from a surgeon to a patient: the Incident Control Team. Commun 
Dis Public Health 1999;2:188--92. 

 89. Ross RS, Viazov S, Gross T, Hofmann F, Seipp HM, Roggendorf M. Brief report: transmission of hepatitis C virus from a patient to an 
anesthesiology assistant to five patients. N Engl J Med 2000;343:1851--4.

 90. Cody SH, Nainan OV, Garfein RS, et al. Hepatitis C virus transmission from an anesthesiologist to a patient. Arch Intern Med 2002; 162:345--50. 

 91. Do AN, Ciesielski CA, Metler RP, Hammett TA, Li J, Fleming PL. Occupationally acquired human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 

infection: national case surveillance data during 20 years of the HIV epidemic in the United States. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:86--96. 

 92. Ciesielski C, Marianos D, Ou CY, et al. Transmission of human immunodeficiency virus in a dental practice. Ann Intern Med 1992; 116:798--805. 

 93. CDC. Investigations of patients who have been treated by HIV-infected health-care workers---United States. MMWR 1993;42: 329--31, 337. 

 94. Bell DM. Occupational risk of human immunodeficiency virus infection in healthcare workers: an overview. Am J Med 1997;102(5B):9--15.

 95. Cardo DM, Culver DH, Ciesielski CA, et al, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Needlestick Surveillance Group. A case-control study 
of HIV seroconversion in health care workers after percutaneous exposure. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1485--90. 

 96. Beltrami EM. The risk and prevention of occupational human immunodeficiency virus infection. Seminars in Infection Control 2001;1:2--18.

 97. CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. NIOSH alert: Preventing needlestick injuries in health care settings. Cincinnati, 
OH: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 1999. 

 98. Klein RS, Phelan JA, Freeman K, et al. Low occupational risk of human immunodeficiency virus infection among dental professionals. N Engl J 
Med 1988;318:86--90. 

 99. Gruninger SE, Siew C, Chang SB, et al. Human immunodeficiency 
virus type I: infection among dentists. J Am Dent Assoc 1992;123:59--64.

 100. Siew C, Gruninger SE, Miaw CL, Neidle EA. Percutaneous injuries in practicing dentists: a propective study using a 20-day diary. J Am Dent 
Assoc 1995;126:1227--34. 

 101. Cleveland JL, Lockwood SA, Gooch BF, et al. Percutaneous injuries in dentistry: an observational study. J Am Dent Assoc 1995;126:745--51. 

 102. Ramos-Gomez F, Ellison J, Greenspan D, Bird W, Lowe S, Gerberding JL. Accidental exposures to blood and body fluids among health care 
workers in dental teaching clinics: a prospective study. J Am Dent Assoc 1997;128:1253--61. 

 103. Cleveland JL, Gooch BF, Lockwood SA. Occupational blood exposure in dentistry: a decade in review. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997; 
18:717--21. 

 104. Gooch BF, Siew C, Cleveland JL, Gruninger SE, Lockwood SA, Joy ED. Occupational blood exposure and HIV infection among oral 
and maxillofacial surgeons. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 1998;85:128--34. 

 105. Gooch BF, Cardo DM, Marcus R, et al. Percutaneous exposures to HIV--infected blood among dental workers enrolled in the CDC needlestick 
study. J Am Dent Assoc 1995;126:1237--42. 

 106. Younai FS, Murphy DC, Kotelchuck D. Occupational exposures to blood in a dental teaching environment: results of a ten-year surveillance study. 
J Dent Educ 2001;65:436--8. 

 107. Carlton JE, Dodson TB, Cleveland JL, Lockwood SA. Percutaneous injuries during oral and maxillofacial surgery procedures. J Oral Maxillofac 
Surg 1997;55:553--6. 

 108. Harte J, Davis R, Plamondon T, Richardson B. The influence of dental unit design on percutaneous injury. J Am Dent Assoc 1998; 129:1725--31. 

 109. US Department of Labor, Occupational Health and Safety Administration. 29 CFR Part 1910. Occupational exposure to bloodborne 
pathogens; needlesticks and other sharps injuries, final rule. Federal Register 2001;66:5325.

 110. CDC. Evaluation of safety devices for preventing percutaneous injuries among health-care workers during phlebotomy 
procedures---Minneapolis-St. Paul, New York City, and San Francisco, 1993--1995. MMWR 1997;46:21--5. 

 111. CDC. Evaluation of blunt suture needles in preventing percutaneous injuries among health-care workers during gynecologic surgical 
procedures---New York City, March 1993--June 1994. MMWR 1997; 46:25--9. 

 112. Mendelson MH, Lin-Chen BY, Solomon R, Bailey E, Kogan G, Goldbold J. Evaluation of a safety resheathable winged steel needle for prevention 
of percutaneous injuries associated with intravascular-access procedures among healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:105--12. 

 113. CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in health-care settings. MMWR 1987;36(No. S2). 

 114. CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to health-care and public-safety workers: 
a response to P.L. 100-607. The Health Omnibus Programs Extension Act of 1988. MMWR 1989;38(No. S6). 

 115. CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. Selecting, evaluating, and using sharps disposal containers. Cincinnati, OH: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 1998. 
DHHS publication no. (NIOSH) 97-111. 

 116. CDC. Public Health Service statement on management of occupational exposure to human immunodeficiency virus, including 
considerations regarding zidovudine postexposure use. MMWR 1990;39 (No. RR-1). 

 117. CDC. Notice to readers update: provisional Public Health Service recommendations for chemoprophylaxis after occupational exposure to 
HIV. MMWR 1996;45:468--72. 

 118. CDC. Public Health Service guidelines for the management of health-care worker exposures to HIV and recommendations for 
postexposure prophylaxis. MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-7). 

 119. CDC. Recommendations for prevention and control of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection and HCV-related chronic disease. MMWR 
1998;47(No. RR-19). 

 120. Steere AC, Mallison GF. Handwashing practices for the prevention of nosocomial infections. Ann Intern Med 1975;83:683--90. 

 121. Garner JS. CDC guideline for prevention of surgical wound infections, 1985. Supersedes guideline for prevention of surgical wound 
infections published in 1982. (Originally published in November 1985). Revised. Infect Control 1986;7:193--200. 

 122. Larson EL. APIC guideline for hand washing and hand antisepsis in health-care settings. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:251--69. 

 123. CDC. Guideline for hand hygiene in health-care settings: recommendations of the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee 
and the HICPAC/SHEA/APIC/IDSA Hand Hygiene Task Force. MMWR 2002;51(No. RR-16). 

 124. Casewell M, Phillips I. Hands as route of transmission for 
Klebsiella species. Br Med J 1977;2:1315--7. 

 125. Larson EL, Early E, Cloonan P, Sugrue S, Parides M. An organizational climate intervention associated with increased handwashing and 
decreased nosocomial infections. Behav Med 2000;26:14--22. 

 126. Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbarth S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-wide programme to improve compliance with hand hygiene. 
Lancet 2000;356:1307--12. 

 127. Price PB. New studies in surgical bacteriology and surgical technique. JAMA 1938;111:1993--6. 

 128. Dewar NE, Gravens DL. Effectiveness of septisol antiseptic foam as a surgical scrub agent. Appl Microbiol 1973;26:544--9. 

 129. Lowbury EJ, Lilly HA. Disinfection of the hands of surgeons and nurses. Br Med J 1960;1445--50. 

 130. Rotter M. Hand washing and hand disinfection. In: Mayhall CG, ed. Hospital epidemiology and infection control. 
2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999:1339--55. 

 131. Widmer AF. Replace hand washing with use of a waterless alcohol hand rub? Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:136--43. 

 132. Larson EL, Butz AM, Gullette DL, Laughon BA. Alcohol for surgical scrubbing? Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:139--43. 

 133. Faoagali J, Fong J, George N, Mahoney P, O'Rouke V. Comparison of the immediate, residual, and cumulative antibacterial effects of Novaderm 
R,* Novascrub R,* Betadine Surgical Scrub, Hibiclens, and liquid soap. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:337--43. 

 134. Association of Perioperative Registered Nurses. Recommended practices for sterilization in the practice setting. In: Fogg D, Parker N, Shevlin D, 
eds. 2002 standards, recommended practices, and guidelines. Denver, CO: AORN, 2002:333--42. 

 135. US Department Of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration. Tentative final monograph for healthcare antiseptic drug 
products; proposed rule. Federal Register 1994;59:31441--52. 

 136. Larson E. A causal link between handwashing and risk of infection? Examination of the evidence. Infection Control.1988;9:28--36. 

 137. Mangram AJ, Horan TC, Pearson ML, Silver LC, Jarvis WR, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for prevention 
of surgical site infection, 1999. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:250--78. 

 138. Doebbeling BN, Pfaller MA, Houston AK, Wenzel RP. Removal of nosocomial pathogens from the contaminated glove. Ann Intern 
Med 1988;109:394--8. 

 139. Kabara JJ, Brady MB. Contamination of bar soaps under "in-use" conditions. J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol 1984;5:1--14. 

 140. Ojajärvi J. The importance of soap selection for routine hand hygiene in hospital. J Hyg (Lond) 1981;86:275--83. 

 141. Larson E, Leyden JJ, McGinley KJ, Grove GL, Talbot GH. Physiologic and microbiologic changes in skin related to frequent handwashing. 
Infect Control 1986;7:59--63. 

 142. Larson E. Handwashing: it's essential---even when you use gloves. Am J Nurs 1989;89:934--9. 

 143. Field EA, McGowan P, Pearce PK, Martin MV. Rings and watches: should they be removed prior to operative dental procedures? J Dent 
1996;24:65--9. 

 144. Hobson DW, Woller W, Anderson L, Guthery E. Development and evaluation of a new alcohol-based surgical hand scrub formulation with 
persistent antimicrobial characteristics and brushless application. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:507--12. 

 145. Mulberry G, Snyder AT, Heilman J, Pyrek J, Stahl J. Evaluation of a waterless, scrubless chlorhexidine gluconate/ethanol surgical scrub 
for antimicrobial efficacy. Am J Infect Control 2001;29:377--82. 

 146. Association of Perioperative Registered Nurses. Recommended practices for surgical hand scrubs. In: Fogg D, Parker N, eds. 2003 
standards, recommended practices, and guidelines. Denver, CO: AORN, Inc., 2003:277--80. 

 147. Larson E, Killien M. Factors influencing handwashing behavior of patient care personnel. Am J Infect Control 1982;10:93--9. 

 148. Zimakoff J, Kjelsberg AB, Larson SO, Holstein B. A multicenter questionnaire investigation of attitudes toward hand hygiene, assessed by the staff 
in fifteen hospitals in Denmark and Norway. Am J Infec Control 1992;20:58--64. 

 149. Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. 
Serratia liquefaciens bloodstream infections from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysis center. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491--7. 

 150. Archibald LK, Corl A, Shah B, et al. 
Serratia marcescens outbreak associated with extrinsic contamination of 1% chlorxylenol soap. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:704--9. 

 151. Larson EL, Norton Hughes CA, Pyrak JD, Sparks SM, Cagatay EU, Bartkus JM. Changes in bacterial flora associated with skin damage on hands 
of health care personnel. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:513--21. 

 152. Ojajärvi J, Mäkelä P, Rantasalo I. Failure of hand disinfection with frequent hand washing: a need for prolonged field studies. J Hyg 
(Lond) 1977;79:107--19. 

 153. Berndt U, Wigger-Alberti W, Gabard B, Elsner P. Efficacy of a barrier cream and its vehicle as protective measures against occupational irritant 
contact dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis 2000;42:77--80. 

 154. McCormick RD, Buchman TL, Maki DG. Double-blind, randomized trial of scheduled use of a novel barrier cream and an 
oil-containing lotion for protecting the hands of health care workers. Am J Infect Control 2000;28:302--10. 

 155. Larson E, Anderson JK, Baxendale L, Bobo L. Effects of a protective foam on scrubbing and gloving. Am J Infect Control 1993;21:297--301.

 156. McGinley KJ, Larson EL, Leyden JJ. Composition and density of microflora in the subungual space of the hand. J Clin Microbiol 1988;26:950--3. 

 157 Pottinger J, Burns S, Manske C. Bacterial carriage by artificial versus natural nails. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:340--4. 

 158. McNeil SA, Foster CL, Hedderwick SA, Kauffman CA. Effect of hand cleansing with antimicrobial soap or alcohol-based gel on 
microbial colonization of artificial fingernails worn by health care workers. Clin Infect Dis 2001;32:367--72. 

 159. Rubin DM. Prosthetic fingernails in the OR: a research study. AORN J 1988;47:944--5. 

 160. Hedderwick SA, McNeil SA, Lyons MJ, Kauffman CA. Pathogenic organisms associated with artificial fingernails worn by healthcare workers. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:505--9. 

 161. Passaro DJ, Waring L, Armstrong R, et al. Postoperative 
Serratia marcescens wound infections traced to an out-of-hospital source. J Infect 
Dis 1997;175:992--5. 

 162. Foca M, Jakob K, Whittier S, et al. Endemic 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in a neonatal intensive care unit. N Engl J Med 
2000; 343:695--700.

 163. Parry MF, Grant B, Yukna M, et al. Candida osteomyelitis and diskitis after spinal surgery: an outbreak that implicates artificial nail use. Clin 
Infect Dis 2001;32:352--7. 

 164. Moolenaar RL, Crutcher M, San Joaquin VH, et al. A prolonged outbreak of 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa in a neonatal intensive care unit: did 
staff fingernails play a role in disease transmission? Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:80--5. 

 165. Baumgardner CA, Maragos CS, Walz J, Larson E. Effects of nail polish on microbial growth of fingernails: dispelling sacred cows. AORN 
J 1993;58:84--8. 

 166. Wynd CA, Samstag DE, Lapp AM. Bacterial carriage on the fingernails of OR nurses. AORN J 1994;60:796, 799--805. 

 167. Lowbury EJ. Aseptic methods in the operating suite. Lancet 1968;1:705--9. 

 168. Hoffman PN, Cooke EM, McCarville MR, Emmerson AM. Micro-organisms isolated from skin under wedding rings worn by hospital staff. Br 
Med J 1985;290:206--7. 

 169. Jacobson G, Thiele JE, McCune JH, Farrell LD. Handwashing: ring-wearing and number of microorganisms. Nurs Res 1985;34:186--8. 

 170. Trick WE, Vernon MO, Hayes RA, et al. Impact of ring wearing on hand contamination and comparison of hand hygiene agents in a hospital. 
Clin Infect Dis 2003; 36:1383--90. 

 171. Salisbury DM, Hutfilz P, Treen LM, Bollin GE, Gautam S. The effect of rings on microbial load of health care workers' hands. Am J Infec 
Control 1997;25:24--7. 

 172. Cochran MA, Miller CH, Sheldrake MS. The efficacy of the rubber dam as a barrier to the spread of microorganisms during dental treatment. J 
Am Dent Assoc 1989;119:141--4. 

 173. Miller CH, Palenik DJ. Aseptic techniques [Chapter 10]. In: Miller CH, Palenik DJ, eds. Infection control and management of hazardous 
materials for the dental team. 2nd ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby, 1998. 

 174. CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. TB respiratory protection program in health care facilities: administrator's 
guide. Cincinnati, OH: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health, 1999. DHHS publication no. (NIOSH) 99-143. 

 175. US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. OSHA 29 CFR 1910.139. Respiratory protection for 
M. tuberculosis. Federal Register 1998;49:442--9.

 176. CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. NIOSH guide to the selection and use of particulate respirators certified under 42 
CFR 84. Cincinnati, OH: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health, 1996. DHHS publication no. (NIOSH) 96-101. 

 177. DeGroot-Kosolcharoen J, Jones JM. Permeability of latex and vinyl gloves to water and blood. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:196--201. 

 178. Korniewicz DM, Laughon BE, Butz A, Larson E. Integrity of vinyl and latex procedure gloves. Nurs Res 1989;38:144--6. 

 179. Olsen RJ, Lynch P, Coyle MB, Cummings J, Bokete T, Stamm WE. Examination gloves as barriers to hand contamination in clinical practice. 
JAMA 1993;270:350--3. 

 180. Murray CA, Burke FJ, McHugh S. An assessment of the incidence of punctures in latex and non-latex dental examination gloves in routine 
clinical practice. Br Dent J 2001;190:377--80. 

 181. Burke FJ, Baggett FJ, Lomax AM. Assessment of the risk of glove puncture during oral surgery procedures. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 
Oral Radiol Endod 1996;82:18--21. 

 182. Burke FJ, Wilson NH. The incidence of undiagnosed punctures in non-sterile gloves. Br Dent J 1990;168:67--71. 

 183. Nikawa H, Hamada T, Tamamoto M, Abekura H. Perforation and proteinaceous contamination of dental gloves during prosthodontic treatments. 
Int J Prosthodont 1994;7:559--66. 

 184. Nikawa H, Hamada T, Tamamoto M, Abekura H, Murata H. Perforation of dental gloves during prosthodontic treatments as assessed by 
the conductivity and water inflation tests. Int J Prosthodont 1996;9:362--6. 

 185. Avery CM, Hjort A, Walsh S, Johnson PA. Glove perforation during surgical extraction of wisdom teeth. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral 
Radiol Endod 1998;86:23--5. 

 186. Otis LL, Cottone JA. Prevalence of perforations in 
disposable latex gloves during routine dental treatment. J Am Dent Assoc 1989; 118:321--4. 

 187. Kotilainen HR, Brinker JP, Avato JL, Gantz NM. Latex and vinyl examination gloves. Quality control procedures and implications for health 

care workers. Arch Intern Med 1989;149:2749--53. 

 188. Food and Drug Administration. Glove powder report. Rockville, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and 
Drug Administration, 1997. Available at 
 http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/glvpwd.html. 

 189. Morgan DJ, Adams D. Permeability studies on protective gloves used in dental practice. Br Dent J 1989;166:11--3. 

 190. Albin MS, Bunegin L, Duke ES, Ritter RR, Page CP. Anatomy of a defective barrier: sequential glove leak detection in a surgical and 
dental environment. Crit Care Med 1992;20:170--84. 

 191. Merchant VA, Molinari JA, Pickett T. Microbial penetration of gloves following usage in routine dental procedures. Am J Dent 1992;5:95--6.

 192. Pitten FA, Herdemann G, Kramer A. The integrity of latex gloves in clinical dental practice. Infection 2000;28:388--92. 

 193. Jamal A, Wilkinson S. The mechanical and microbiological integrity of surgical gloves. ANZ J Surg 2003;73:140--3. 

 194. Korniewicz DM, El-Masri MM, Broyles JM, Martin CD, O'Connell KP. A laboratory-based study to assess the performance of surgical gloves. 
AORN J 2003;77:772--9. 

 195. Schwimmer A, Massoumi M, Barr CE. Efficacy of double gloving to prevent inner glove perforation during outpatient oral surgical procedures. J 
Am Dent Assoc 1994;125:196--8. 

 196. Patton LL, Campbell TL, Evers SP. Prevalence of glove perforations during double-gloving for dental procedures. Gen Dent 1995;43:22--6.

 197. Gerberding JL, Littell C, Tarkington A, Brown A, Schecter WP. Risk of exposure of surgical personnel to patients' blood during surgery at 
San Francisco General Hospital. N Engl J Med 1990;322:1788--93. 

 198. Klein RC, Party E, Gershey EL. Virus penetration of examination gloves. Biotechniques 1990;9:196--9. 

 199. Mellstrom GA, Lindberg M, Boman A. Permeation and destructive effects of disinfectants on protective gloves. Contact Dermatitis 1992;26:163--70. 

 200. Jordan SL, Stowers MF, Trawick EG, Theis AB. Glutaraldehyde permeation: choosing the proper glove. Am J Infect Control 1996;24:67--9.

 201. Cappuccio WR, Lees PS, Breysse PN, Margolick JB. Evaluation of integrity of gloves used in a flow cytometry laboratory. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:423--5. 

 202. Monticello MV, Gaber DJ. Glove resistance to permeation by a 7.5% hydrogen peroxide sterilizing and disinfecting solution. Am J Infec 
Control 1999;27:364--6. 

 203. Baumann MA, Rath B, Fischer JH, Iffland R. The permeability of dental procedure and examination gloves by an alcohol based disinfectant. 
Dent Mater 2000;16:139--44. 

 204. Ready MA, Schuster GS, Wilson JT, Hanes CM. Effects of dental medicaments on examination glove permeability. J Prosthet Dent 
1989;61:499--503. 

 205. Richards JM, Sydiskis RJ, Davidson WM, Josell SD, Lavine DS. Permeability of latex gloves after contact with dental materials. Am J 
Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 1993;104:224--9. 

 206. Andersson T, Bruze M, Bjorkner B. In vivo testing of the protection of gloves against acrylates in dentin-bonding systems on patients with known 
contact allergy to acrylates. Contact Dermatitis 1999;41:254--9.

 207. Reitz CD, Clark NP. The setting of vinyl polysiloxane and condensation silicone putties when mixed with gloved hands. J Am Dent 
Assoc 1988;116:371--5. 

 208. Kahn RL, Donovan TE, Chee WW. Interaction of gloves and rubber dam with a poly (vinyl siloxane) impression material: a screening test. Int 
J Prosthodont 1989;2:342--6. 

 209. Matis BA, Valadez D, Valadez E. The effect of the use of dental gloves on mixing vinyl polysiloxane putties. J Prosthodont 1997;6:189--92. 

 210. Wright JG, McGeer AJ, Chyatte D, Ransohoff DF. Mechanisms of glove tears and sharp injuries among surgical personnel. JAMA 
1991;266:1668--71. 

 211. Dodds RD, Guy PJ, Peacock AM, Duffy SR, Barker SG, Thomas MH. Surgical glove perforation. Br J Surg 1988;75:966--8. 

 212. Adams D, Bagg J, Limaye M, Parsons K, Absi EG. A clinical evaluation of glove washing and re-use in dental practice. J Hosp Infect 
1992;20:153--62. 

 213. Martin MV, Dunn HM, Field EA, et al. A physical and microbiological evaluation of the re-use of non-sterile gloves. Br Dent J 1988;165:321--4. 

 214. US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration. 21 CFR Part 800. Medical devices; patient examination 
and surgeon's gloves. Adulteration, final rule. Federal Register 1990;55:51254--8. 

 215. Giglio JA, Roland RW, Laskin DM, Grenevicki L. The use of sterile versus nonsterile gloves during out-patient exodontia. Quintessence 
Int 1993;24:543--5. 

 216. Cheung LK, Chow LK, Tsang MH, Tung LK. An evaluation of complications following dental extractions using either sterile or clean gloves. Int 
J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2001;30:550--4. 

 217. Gani JS, Anseline PF, Bissett RL. Efficacy of double versus single gloving in protecting the operating team. Aust N Z J Surg 1990;60:171--5. 

 218. Short LJ, Bell DM. Risk of occupational infection with blood-borne pathogens in operating and delivery room settings. Am J Infect 
Control 1993;21:343--50. 

 219. Tokars JI, Culver DH, Mendelson MH, et al. Skin and mucous membrane contacts with blood during surgical procedures: risk and prevention. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1995;16:703--11. 

 220. Tanner J, Parkinson H. Double gloving to reduce surgical cross-infection (Cochrane Review). The Cochrane Library 2003;(Issue 2):1--32.

 221. Webb JM, Pentlow BD. Double gloving and surgical technique. Ann R Coll Surg Engl 1993;75:291--2. 

 222. Watts D, Tassler PL, Dellon AL. The effect of double gloving on cutaneous sensibility, skin compliance and suture identification. Contemp 
Surg 1994;44:289--92. 

 223. Wilson SJ, Sellu D, Uy A, Jaffer MA. Subjective effects of double gloves on surgical performance. Ann R Coll Surg Engl 1996;78:20--2. 

 224. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for industry and FDA: medical glove guidance manual [Draft guidance]. Rockville, MD: US 

Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration, 1999. Available at 
 http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/dsma/135.html#_Toc458914315. 

 225. Dillard SF, Hefflin B, Kaczmarek RG, Petsonk EL, Gross TP. Health effects associated with medical glove use. AORN J 2002;76:88--96. 

 226. Hamann CP, Turjanmaa K, Rietschel R, et al. Natural rubber latex hypersensitivity: incidence and prevalence of type I allergy in the 
dental professional. J Am Dent Assoc 1998;129:43--54. 

 227. Siew C, Hamann C, Gruninger SE, Rodgers P, Sullivan KM. 2003.Type I Latex Allergic Reactions among Dental Professionals, 1996--2001. 

Journal of Dental Research, 82 (Special Issue): #1718. 

 228. Saary MJ, Kanani A, Alghadeer H, Holness DL, Tarlo SM. Changes in rates of natural rubber latex sensitivity among dental school students and 
staff members after changes in latex gloves. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002;109:131--5. 

 229. Hunt LW, Kelkar P, Reed CE, Yunginger JW. Management of occupational allergy to natural rubber latex in a medical center: the importance 
of quantitative latex allergen measurement and objective follow-up. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002; 110(suppl 2):S96--106. 

 230. Turjanmaa K, Kanto M, Kautiainen H, Reunala T, Palosuo T. Long-term outcome of 160 adult patients with natural rubber latex allergy. J 
Allergy Clin Immunol 2002; 110(suppl 2):S70--4. 

 231. Heilman DK, Jones RT, Swanson MC, Yunginger JW. A prospective, controlled study showing that rubber gloves are the major contributor to 
latex aeroallergen levels in the operating room. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1996;98:325--30. 

 232. Baur X, Jager D. Airborne antigens from latex gloves. Lancet 1990; 335:912. 

 233. Turjanmaa K, Reunala T, Alenius H, Brummer-Korvenkontio H, Palosuo T. Allergens in latex surgical gloves and glove powder. 
Lancet 1990;336:1588. 

 234. Baur X, Chen Z, Allmers H. Can a threshold limit value for natural rubber latex airborne allergens be defined? J Allergy Clin Immunol 
1998;101:24--7. 

 235. Trape M, Schenck P, Warren A. Latex gloves use and symptoms in health care workers 1 year after implementaion of a policy restricting the use 
of powdered gloves. Am J Infec Control 2000;28:352--8. 

 236. Allmers H, Brehler R, Chen Z, Raulf-Heimsoth M, Fels H, Baur X. Reduction of latex aeroallergens and latex-specific IgE antibodies in 
sensitized workers after removal of powdered natural rubber latex gloves in a hospital. Allergy Clin Immunol 1998;102:841--6. 

 237. Tarlo SM, Sussman G, Contala A, Swanson MC. Control of airborne latex by use of powder-free latex gloves. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
1994;93:985--9. 

 238. Swanson MC, Bubak ME, Hunt LW, Yunginger JW, Warner MA, Reed CE. Quantification of occupational latex aeroallergens in a medical center. 
J Allergy Clin Immunol 1994;94:445--551. 

 239. Hermesch CB, Spackman GK, Dodge WW, Salazar A. Effect of powder-free latex examination glove use on airborne powder levels in a dental 
school clinic. J Dent Educ 1999;63:814--20. 

 240. Miller CH. Infection control strategies for the dental office [Chapter 29]. In: Ciancio SG, ed. ADA guide to dental therapeutics. 
2nd ed. Chicago, IL: ADA Publishing, 2000:543--58. 

 241. Primeau MN, Adkinson NF Jr, Hamilton RG. Natural rubber pharmaceutical vial closures release latex allergens that produce skin reactions. J 
Allergy Clin Immunol 2001;107:958--62. 

 242. Spaulding EH. Chemical disinfection of medical and surgical materials [Chapter 32]. In: Lawrence CA, Block SS, eds. Disinfection, sterilization 
and preservation. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1968: 517--31. 

 243. CDC. Guideline for disinfection and sterilization in healthcare facilities: recommendations of CDC and the Healthcare Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR (in press). 

 244. CDC. Guidelines for environmental infection control in health-care facilities: recommendations of CDC and the Healthcare Infection 
Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 2003;52(No. RR-10). 

 245. US Environmental Protection Agency. 40 CFR Parts 152, 156, and 158. Exemption of certain pesticide substances from federal insecticide, 
fungicide, and rodenticide act requirements. Amended 1996. Federal Register 1996;61:8876--9.

 246. Food and Drug Administration. Dental handpiece sterilization [Letter]. Rockville, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services, Food 
and Drug Administration, 1992. 

 247. Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, American National Standards Institute. Steam sterilization and sterility assurance 
in health care facilities. ANSI/AAMI ST46-2002. Arlington, VA: Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, 2002. 

 248. Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, American National Standards Institute. Steam sterilization and sterility assurance 
using table-top sterilizers in office-based, ambulatory-care medical, surgical, and dental facilities. ANSI/AAMI ST40-1998. Arlington, VA: Association 
for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, 1998. 

 249. Favero MS, Bond WW. Chemical disinfection of medical and surgical material [Chapter 43]. In: Block SS, ed. Disinfection, sterilization 
and preservation. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001:881--917. 

 250. Parker HH 4th, Johnson RB. Effectiveness of ethylene oxide for sterilization of dental handpieces. J Dent 1995;23:113--5. 

 251. Alfa MJ, Olson N, Degagne P, Hizon R. New low temperature sterilization technologies: microbicidal activity and clinical efficacy [Chapter 9]. 
In: Rutala WA, ed. Disinfection, sterilization, and antisepsis in health-care. Champlain, NY: Polyscience Publications, 1998:67--78. 

 252. Rutala WA, Weber DJ. Clinical effectiveness of low-temperature sterilization technologies. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998; 19:798--804. 

 253. Miller CH, Tan CM, Beiswanger MA, Gaines DJ, Setcos JC, Palenik CJ. Cleaning dental instruments: measuring the effectiveness of an 
instrument washer/disinfector. Am J Dent 2000;13:39--43. 

 254. Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. Chemical indicators---guidance for the selection, use, and interpretation of 
results. AAMI Technical Information Report No. 25. Arlington, VA: Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, 1999. 

 255. Ninemeier J. Central service technical manual. 
5th ed. Chicago, IL: International Association of Healthcare Central Service Materiel 
Management, 1998. 

 256. Rutala WA, Weber DJ. Choosing a sterilization wrap for surgical packs. Infection Control Today 2000;4:64,70. 

 257. Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, American National Standards Institute. Good hospital practice: steam sterilization 
and sterility assurance. ANSI/AAMI ST46-1993. Arlington, VA: 

Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, 1993. 

 258. Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, American National Standards Institute. Flash sterilization: steam sterilization of 
patient care items for immediate use. ANSI/AAMI ST37-1996. Arlington, VA: Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, 1996. 

 259. Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, American National Standards Institute. Ethylene oxide sterilization in health 
care facilities: safety and effectiveness. ANSI/AAMI ST41-1999. Arlington, VA: Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, 1999. 

 260. Miller CH, Palenik CJ. Sterilization, disinfection, and asepsis in dentistry [Chapter 53]. In: Block SS, ed. 
5th ed. Disinfection, sterilization, 
and preservation. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001:1049--68. 

 261. Joslyn LJ. Sterilization by heat [Chapter 36]. In: Block SS, ed. 

5th ed. Disinfection, sterilization, and preservation. Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001:695--728. 

 262. Rutala WA, Weber DJ, Chappell KJ. Patient injury from flash-sterilized instruments. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:458.

 263. Bond WW. Biological indicators for a liquid chemical sterilizer: a solution to the instrument reprocessing problem? Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1993;14:309--12. 

 264. Stingeni L, Lapomarda V, Lisi P. Occupational hand dermatitis in hospital environments. Contact Dermatitis 1995;33:172--6. 

 265. Ashdown BC, Stricof DD, May ML, Sherman SJ, Carmody RF. Hydrogen peroxide poisoning causing brain infarction: neuroimaging findings. Am 
J Roentgenol 1998;170:1653--5. 

 266. Ballantyne B. Toxicology of glutaraldehyde: review of studies and human health effects. Danbury, CT: Union Carbide, 1995. 

 267. CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. Glutaraldehyde: occupational hazards in hospitals. Cincinnati, OH: US Department 
of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 2001. DHHS publication 
no. (NIOSH) 2001-115.

 268 CDC. Epidemiologic notes and reports: symptoms of irritation associated with exposure to glutaraldehyde---Colorado. MMWR 1987;36:190--1. 

 269. Lehman PA, Franz TJ, Guin JD. Penetration of glutaraldehyde through glove material: tactylon versus natural rubber latex. Contact 
Dermatitis 1994;30:176--7. 

 270. Hamann CP, Rodgers PA, Sullivan K. Allergic contact dermatitis in dental professionals: effective diagnosis and treatment. J Am Dent 
Assoc 2003;134:185--94. 

 271. Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, American National Standards Institute. Safe use and handling of 
glutaraldehyde-based products in health care facilities. ANSI/AAMI ST58-1996. Arlington, VA: Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, 1996. 
 272. Fisher AA. Ethylene oxide dermatitis. Cutis 1984;34:20, 22, 24. 

 273. Jay WM, Swift TR, Hull DS. Possible relationship of ethylene oxide exposure to cataract formation. Am J Ophthalmol 1982;93:727--32. 

 274. US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Review of the ethylene oxide standard. Federal Register 
2000;65:35127--8. 

 275. Pratt LH, Smith DG, Thornton RH, Simmons JB, Depta BB, Johnson RB. The effectiveness of two sterilization methods when different 
precleaning techniques are employed. J Dent 1999;27:247--8. 

 276. US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration. 21 CFR Part 872.6730. Dental devices; endodontic dry 
heat sterilizer; final rule. Federal Register 1997;62:2903. 

 277. Favero MS. Current issues in hospital hygiene and sterilization technology. J Infect Control (Asia Pacific Edition) 1998;1:8--10. 

 278. Greene WW. Control of sterilization process [Chapter 22]. In: Russell AD, Hugo WB, Ayliffe GA, eds. Principles and practice of 
disinfection, preservation, and sterilization. Oxford, England: Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1992:605--24. 

 279. Favero MS. Developing indicators for sterilization [Chapter 13]. In: Rutala W, ed. Disinfection, sterilization, and antisepsis in health 
care. Washington, DC: Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc., 1998:119--32. 

 280. Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Flash sterilization: carefully measured haste. Infect Control 1987;8:307--10. 

 281. Andres MT, Tejerina JM, Fierro JF. Reliability of biologic indicators in a mail-return sterilization-monitoring service: a review of 3 years. 
Quintessence Int 1995;26:865--70. 

 282. Miller CH, Sheldrake MA. The ability of biological indicators to detect sterilization failures. Am J Dent 1994;7:95--7. 

 283. Association of Operating Room Nurses. AORN standards and recommended practices for perioperative nursing. Denver, CO: AORN, 1987. 

 284. Mayworm D. Sterile shelf life and expiration dating. J Hosp Supply Process Distrib 1984;2:32--5. 

 285. Cardo DM, Sehulster LM. Central sterile supply [Chapter 65]. In: Mayhall CG, ed. Hospital Epidemiology and Infection Control. 
2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999:1023--30. 

 286. Maki DG, Alvarado CJ, Hassemer CA, Zilz MA. Relation of the inanimate hospital environment to endemic nosocomial infection. N Engl J 
Med 1982;307:1562--6. 

 287. Danforth D, Nicolle LE, Hume K, Alfieri N, Sims H. Nosocomial infections on nursing units with floors cleaned with a disinfectant compared 
with detergent. J Hosp Infect 1987;10:229--35. 

 288. Crawford JJ. Clinical asepsis in dentistry. Mesquite, TX: Oral Medicine Press, 1987. 

 289. Food and Drug Administration. Design control guidance for medical device manufacturers. Rockville, MD: US Department of Health and 
Human Services, Food and Drug Administration, 1997. 

 290. Fauerbach LL, Janelle JW. Practical applications in infection control [Chapter 45]. In: Block SS, ed. 
5th ed. Disinfection, sterilization, 
and preservation. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001:935--44. 

 291. Martin LS, McDougal JS, Loskoski SL. Disinfection and inactivation of the human T lymphotrophic virus type 
III/lymphadenopathy-associated virus. J Infect Dis 1985;152:400--3. 

 292. Bloomfield SF, Smith-Burchnell CA, Dalgleish AG. Evaluation of hypochlorite-releasing disinfectants against the human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV). J Hosp Infect 1990;15:273--8. 

 293. Gerson SL, Parker P, Jacobs MR, Creger R, Lazarus HM. Aspergillosis due to carpet contamination. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:221--3. 

 294. Suzuki A, Namba Y, Matsuura M, Horisawa A. Bacterial contamination of floors and other surfaces in operating rooms: a five--year survey. J 
Hyg (Lond) 1984;93:559--66. 

 295. Skoutelis AT, Westenfelder GO, Beckerdite M, Phair JP. Hospital carpeting and epidemiology of 
Clostridium difficile. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:212--7. 

 296. Rutala WA, Odette RL, Samsa GP. Management of infectious waste by US hospitals. JAMA 1989;262:1635--40. 

 297. CDC. Perspectives in disease prevention and health promotion. Summary of the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry report to 
Congress: the public health implications of medical waste. MMWR 1990; 39:822--4. 

 298. Palenik CJ. Managing regulated waste in dental environments. J Contemp Dent Pract 2003;4:76. 

 299. Rutala WA, Mayhall CG. Medical waste. Infect Control Hosp Edidemiol 1992;13:38--48. 

 300. Greene R, State and Territorial Association on Alternate Treatment Technologies. Technical assistance manual: state regulatory oversight of 
medical waste treatment technologies. 
2nd ed. Washington, DC: US Environmental Protection Agency, 1994. Available at 

 http://www.epa.gov/epaoswer/other/medical/mwpdfs/ta/1.pdf.

 301. US Environmental Protection Agency. 40 CFR Part 60. Standards of performance for new stationary sources and emission guidelines for 
existing sources: hospital/medical/infectious waste incinerators; final rule. Federal Register 1997;62:48347--91. 

 302. Slade JS, Pike EB, Eglin RP, Colbourne JS, Kurtz JB. The survival of human immunodeficiency virus in water, sewage, and sea water. Water Sci 
Tech 1989;21:55--9. 

 303. Walker JT, Bradshaw DJ, Bennett AM, Fulford MR, Martin MV, Marsh PD. Microbial biofilm formation and contamination of dental-unit 
water systems in general dental practice. Appl Environ Microbiol 2000;66:3363--7. 

 304. Schulze-Robbecke R, Feldmann C, Fischeder R, Janning B, Exner M, Wahl G. Dental units: an environmental study of sources of 
potentially pathogenic mycobacteria. Tuber Lung Dis 1995;76:318--23. 

 305. Barbeau J, Tanguay R, Faucher E, et al. Multiparametric analysis of waterline contamination in dental units. Appl Environ Microbiol 
1996;62:3954--9. 

 306. Atlas RM, Williams JF, Huntington MK. 
Legionella contamination of dental-unit waters. Appl Environ Microbiol 1995;61:1208--13. 

 307. Kelstrup J, Funder-Nielsen T, Theilade J. Microbial aggregate contamination of water lines in dental equipment and its control. Acta Pathol 
Microbiol Scand [B] 1977;85:177--83. 

 308. Challacombe SJ, Fernandes LL. Detecting 
Legionella pneumophila in water systems: a comparison of various dental units. J Am Dent 
Assoc 1995;126:603--8. 

 309. Mayo JA, Oertling KM, Andrieu SC. Bacterial biofilm: a source of contamination in dental air-water syringes. Clin Prev Dent 1990;12:13--20.

 310. Scheid RC, Kim CK, Bright JS, Whitely MS, Rosen S. Reduction of microbes in handpieces by flushing before use. J Am Dent Assoc 
1982;105:658--60. 

 311. Bagga BS, Murphy RA, Anderson AW, Punwani I. Contamination of dental unit cooling water with oral microorganisms and its prevention. J 
Am Dent Assoc 1984;109:712--6. 

 312. Martin MV. The significance of the bacterial contamination of dental unit water systems. Br Dent J 1987;163:152--4. 

 313. Pankhurst CL, Philpott-Howard JN, Hewitt JH, Casewell MW. The efficacy of chlorination and filtration in the control and eradication of 
Legionella from dental chair water systems. J Hosp Infect 1990;16:9--18.

 314. Mills SE, Lauderdale PW, Mayhew RB. Reduction of microbial contamination in dental units with povidone-iodine 10%. J Am Dent 
Assoc 1986;113:280--4. 

 315. Williams JF, Johnston AM, Johnson B, Huntington MK, Mackenzie CD. Microbial contamination of dental unit waterlines: prevalence, intensity 
and microbiological characteristics. J Am Dent Assoc 1993;124:59--65. 

 316. Mills SE. The dental unit waterline controversy: defusing the myths, defining the solutions. J Am Dent Assoc 2000;131:1427--41. 

 317. Jones F, Bartlett CL. Infections associated with whirlpools and spas. Soc Appl Bacteriol Symp Ser 1985;14:61S--6S. 

 318. Hollyoak V, Allison D, Summers J. 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa wound infection associated with a nursing home's whirlpool bath. Commun Dis 
Rep CDR Rev 1995;5:R100--2. 

 319. Begg N, O'Mahony M, Penny P, Richardson EA, Basavaraj DS. 

Mycobacterium chelonei associated with a hospital hydrotherapy pool. 
Community Med 1986;8:348--50. 

 320. Laussucq S, Baltch AL, Smith RP, et al. Nosocomial 
Mycobacterium fortuitum colonization from a contaminated ice machine. Am Rev Respir Dis 1988;138:891--4. 

 321. Struelens MJ, Rost F, Deplano A, et al. 

Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Enterobacteriaceae bacteremia after biliary endoscopy: an outbreak 
investigation using DNA macrorestriction analysis. Am J Med 1993;95: 489--98. 

 322. Kuritsky JN, Bullen MG, Broome CV, Silcox VA, Good RC, Wallace RJ Jr. Sternal wound infections and endocarditis due to organisms of 
the Mycobacterium fortuitum complex. Ann Intern Med 1983;98:938--9.

 323. Bolan G, Reingold AL, Carson LA, et al. Infections with 
Mycobacterium chelonei in patients receiving dialysis and using processed hemodialyzers. 
J Infect Dis 1985;152:1013--9. 

 324. Lessing MP, Walker MM. Fatal pulmonary infection due to 
Mycobacterium fortuitum. J Clin Pathol 1993;46:271--2. 

 325. Arnow PM, Chou T, Weil D, Shapiro EN, Kretzschmar C. Nosocomial Legionnaires' disease caused by aerosolized tap water from respiratory 
devices. J Infect Dis 1982;146:460--7. 

 326. Breiman RF, Fields BS, Sanden GN, Volmer L, Meier A, Spika JS. Association of shower use with Legionnaires' disease: possible role of 
amoebae. JAMA 1990;263:2924--6. 

 327. Garbe PL, Davis BJ, Weisfeld JS, et al. Nosocomial Legionnaires' disease: epidemiologic demonstration of cooling towers as a source. 

JAMA 1985;254:521--4. 

 328. Fallon RJ, Rowbotham TJ. Microbiological investigations into an outbreak of Pontiac fever due to 
Legionella micdadei associated with use of 

a whirlpool. J Clin Pathol 1990;43:479--83. 

 329. Rose CS, Martyny JW, Newman LS, et al. "Lifeguard lung": endemic granulomatous pneumonitis in an indoor swimming pool. Am J Public 
Health 1998;88:1795--1800. 

 330. CDC. Epidemiologic notes and reports: Legionnaires' disease outbreak associated with a grocery store mist machine---Louisiana, 1989. 
MMWR 1990;39:108--10. 

 331. Jacobs RL, Thorner RE, Holcomb JR, Schwietz LA, Jacobs FO. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis caused by 
Cladosporium in an enclosed hot-tub area. Ann Intern Med 1986;105:204--6. 

 332. Clark A. Bacterial colonization of dental units and the nasal flora of dental personnel. Proc Roy Soc Med 1974;67:1269--70. 

 333. Fotos PG, Westfall HN, Snyder IS, Miller RW, Mutchler BM. Prevalence of 
Legionella-specific IgG and IgM antibody in a dental clinic population. 
J Dent Res 1985;64:1382--5. 

 334. Reinthaler FF, Mascher F, Stunzner D. Serological examinations for antibodies against Legionella species in dental personnel. J Dent Res 
1988;67:942--3. 

 335. Putnins EE, Di Giovanni D, Bhullar AS. Dental unit waterline contamination and its possible implications during periodontal surgery. J 
Periodontol 2001;72:393--400. 

 336. United States Pharmacopeial Convention. Sterile water for irrigation. In: United States Pharmacopeial Convention. United States pharmacopeia 
and national formulary. USP 24--NF 19. Rockville, MD: United States Pharmacopeial Convention, 1997:1753. 

 337. Milton DK, Wypij D, Kriebel D, Walters MD, Hammond SK, Evans JS. Endotoxin exposure-response in a fiberglass manufacturing facility. Am J 
Ind Med 1996;29:3--13. 

 338. Santiago JI. Microbial contamination of dental unit waterlines: short and long term effects of flushing. Gen Dent 1994;42:528--35. 

 339. Shearer BG. Biofilm and the dental office. J Am Dent Assoc 1996; 127:181--9. 

 340. Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, American National Standards Institute. Hemodialysis systems. ANSI/AAMI 
RD5-1992. Arlington, VA: Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, 1993. 

 341. US Environmental Protection Agency. National primary drinking water regulations, 1999: list of contaminants. Washington DC: US 
Environmental Protection Agency, 1999. Available at 
 http://www.epa.gov/safewater/mcl.html.

 342. American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association, Water Environment Foundation. In: Eaton AD, Clesceri LS, Greenberg 
AE, eds. Standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater. Washington, DC: American Public Health Association, 1999. 

 343. Williams HN, Johnson A, Kelley JI, et al. Bacterial contamination of the water supply in newly installed dental units. Quintessence Int 
1995;26:331--7. 

 344. Scheid RC, Rosen S, Beck FM. Reduction of CFUs in high-speed handpiece water lines over time. Clin Prev Dent 1990;12:9--12. 

 345. Williams HN, Kelley J, Folineo D, Williams GC, Hawley CL, Sibiski J. Assessing microbial contamination in clean water dental units 
and compliance with disinfection protocol. J Am Dent Assoc 1994;125: 1205--11. 

 346. CDC, Working Group on Waterborne Cryptosporidiosis. Cryptosporidium and water: a public health handbook. Atlanta, GA: US Department 
of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, CDC, 1997. 

 347. MacKenzie WR, Hoxie NJ, Proctor ME, et al. A massive outbreak in Milwaukee of cryptosporidium infection transmitted through the public 
water supply. N Engl J Med 1994;331:161--7. 

 348. Kaminski JC. Cryptosporidium and the public water supply. N Engl J Med 1994;331:1529--30. 

 349. CDC. Assessing the public health threat associated with waterborne cryptosporidiosis: report of a workshop. MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-6).

 350. CDC. Surveillance for waterborne-disease outbreaks---United States, 1993--1994. MMWR 1996;45(No. SS-1). 

 351. Office of Water, US Environmental Protection Agency. Lead and copper rule: summary of revisions. EPA 815--R--99--020. Washington DC: 
US Environmental Protection Agency, 2000.

 352. US Environmental Protection Agency. 65 CFR Parts 141 and 142. National primary drinking water regulations for lead and copper, final rule. 
Federal Register 2000;1949--2015. 

 353. Gooch B, Marianos D, Ciesielski C, et al. Lack of evidence for patient-to-patient transmission of HIV in a dental practice. J Am Dent 
Assoc 1993;124:38--44. 

 354. Crawford JJ, Broderius C. Control of cross-infection risks in the dental operatory: preventon of water retraction by bur cooling spray systems. J 
Am Dent Assoc 1988;116:685--7. 

 355. Mills SE, Kuehne JC, Bradley DV Jr. Bacteriological analysis of high-speed handpiece turbines. J Am Dent Assoc 1993;124:59--62. 

 356. Lewis DL, Arens M, Appleton SS, et al. Cross-contamination potential with dental equipment. Lancet 1992;340:1252--4. 

 357. Lewis DL, Boe RK. Cross-infection risks associated with current procedures for using high-speed dental handpieces. J Clin Microbiol 1992;30:401--6. 

 358. Checchi L, Montebugnoli L, Samaritani S. Contamination of the turbine air chamber: a risk of cross infection. J Clin Periodontol 1998;25:607--11. 

 359. Epstein JB, Rea G, Sibau L, Sherlock CH, Le ND. Assessing viral retention and elimination in rotary dental instruments. J Am Dent 
Assoc 1995;126:87--92. 

 360. Kolstad RA. How well does the chemiclave sterilize handpieces? J Am Dent Assoc 1998;129:985--91. 

 361. Kuehne JS, Cohen ME, Monroe SB. Performance and durability of autoclavable high-speed dental handpieces. NDRI-PR 92-03. Bethesda, 
MD: Naval Dental Research Institute, 1992. 

 362. Andersen HK, Fiehn NE, Larsen T. Effect of steam sterilization inside the turbine chambers of dental turbines. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 
Oral Radiol Endod 1999;87:184--8. 

 363. Leonard DL, Charlton DG. Performance of high-speed dental handpieces subjected to simulated clinical use and sterilization. J Am Dent 
Assoc 1999;130:1301--11. 

 364. Barbeau J, ten Bokum L, Gauthier C, Prevost AP. 
Cross-contamination potential of saliva ejectors used in dentistry. J Hosp Infect 1998; 40:303--11.

 365. Mann GL, Campbell TL, Crawford JJ. Backflow in low-volume suction lines: the impact of pressure changes. J Am Dent Assoc 1996;127:611--5. 

 366. Watson CM, Whitehouse RL. Possibility of cross-contamination between dental patients by means of the saliva ejector. J Am Dent 
Assoc 1993;124:77--80. 

 367. Glass BJ, Terezhalmy GT. Infection control in dental radiology [Chapter 15]. In: Cottone JA, Terezhalamy GT, Molinari JA, eds. Practical 
infection control in dentisty. 2nd ed. Baltimore. MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1996:229--38. 

 368. Haring JI, Jansen L. Infection control and the dental radiographer. In: Haring JI, Jansen L, eds. Dental radiography: principles and 
techniques. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 2000:194--204. 

 369. Hignett M, Claman P. High rates of perforation are found in endovaginal ultrasound probe covers before and after oocyte retrieval for in 
vitro fertilization-embryo transfer. J Assist Reprod Genet 1995;12:606--9. 

 370. Fritz S, Hust MH, Ochs C, Gratwohl I, Staiger M, Braun B. Use of a latex cover sheath for transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) instead of 
regular disinfection of the echoscope? Clin Cardiol 1993;16:737--40.

 371. Milki AA, Fisch JD. Vaginal ultrasound probe cover leakage: implications for patient care. Fertil Steril 1998;69:409--11. 

 372. Storment JM, Monga M, Blanco JD. Ineffectiveness of latex condoms in preventing contamination of the transvaginal ultrasound transducer 
head. South Med J 1997;90:206--8. 

 373. Amis S, Ruddy M, Kibbler CC, Economides DL, MacLean AB. Assessment of condoms as probe covers for transvaginal sonography. J 
Clin Ultrasound 2000;28:295--8. 

 374. Rooks VJ, Yancey MK, Elg SA, Brueske L. Comparison of probe sheaths for endovaginal sonography. Obstet Gynecol 1996;87:27--9. 

 375. Hokett SD, Honey JR, Ruiz F, Baisden MK, Hoen MM. Assessing the effectiveness of direct digital radiography barrier sheaths and finger cots. J 
Am Dent Assoc 2000;131:463--7. 

 376. ASHP Council on Professional Affairs. ASHP guidelines on quality assurance for pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2000;57:1150--69. 

 377. Green KA, Mustachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. Gadolinium-based MR contrast media: potential for growth of 
microbial contaminants when single vials are used for multiple patients. Am J Roentgenol 1995;165:669--71.

 378. American Society of Anesthesiologists. Recommendations for infection control for the practice of anesthesiology. 2nd ed. Park Ridge, IL: 
American Society of Anesthesiologists,1999. 

 379. Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of 
Serratia marcescens associated with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect 
Control 2001;29:312--5. 

 380. Plott RT, Wagner RF Jr, Tyring SK. Iatrogenic contamination of multidose vials in simulated use. A reassessment of current patient 
injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441--4. 

 381. Arrington ME, Gabbert KC, Mazgaj PW, Wolf MT. Multidose vial contamination in anesthesia. AANA J 1990;58:462--6. 

 382. CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of infections among chronic hemodialysis patients. MMWR 2001;50(No. RR-5). 

 383. Food and Drug Administration. Labeling recommendations for single-use devices reprocessed by third parties and hospitals; final guidance 
for industry and FDA. Rockville, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration, 2001. 

 384. Villasenor A, Hill SD, Seale NS. Comparison of two ultrasonic cleaning units for deterioration of cutting edges and debris removal on dental 
burs. Pediatr Dent 1992;14:326--30. 

 385. Rapisarda E, Bonaccorso A, Tripi TR, Condorelli GG. Effect of sterilization on the cutting efficiency of rotary nickel-titanium endodontic files. Oral 
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 1999;88:343--7.

 386. Filho IB, Esberard RM, Leonardo R, del Rio CE. Microscopic evaluation of three endodontic files pre- and postinstrumentation. J 
Endodontics 1998;24:461--4. 

 387. Silvaggio J, Hicks ML. Effect of heat sterilization on the torsional properties of rotary nickel-titanium endodontic files. J Endodontics 
1997;23:731--4. 

 388. Kazemi RB, Stenman E, Spangberg LS. The endodontic file is a disposable instrument. J Endodontics 1995;21:451--5. 

 389. Dajani AS, Bisno AL, Chung KJ, et al. Prevention of bacterial endocarditis: recommendations by the American Heart Association. 
JAMA 1990;264:2919--22. 

 390. Pallasch TJ, Slots J. Antibiotic prophylaxis and the medically compromised patient. Periodontology 2000 1996;10:107--38. 

 391. Litsky BY, Mascis JD, Litsky W. Use of an antimicrobial mouthwash to minimize the bacterial aerosol contamination generated by the 
high-speed drill. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1970;29:25--30. 

 392. Mohammed CI, Monserrate V. Preoperative oral rinsing as a means of reducing air contamination during use of air turbine handpieces. Oral 
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1970;29:291--4. 

 393. Wyler D, Miller RL, Micik RE. Efficacy of self-administered preoperative oral hygiene procedures in reducing the concentration of bacteria in 
aerosols generated during dental procedures. J Dent Res 1971;50:509. 

 394. Muir KF, Ross PW, MacPhee IT, Holbrook WP, Kowolik MJ. Reduction of microbial contamination from ultrasonic scalers. Br Dent J 
1978;145:76--8. 

 395. Fine DH, Mendieta C, Barnett ML, et al. Efficacy of preprocedural rinsing with an antiseptic in reducing viable bacteria in dental aerosols. 
J Periodontol 1992;63:821--4. 

 396. Fine DH, Furgang D, Korik I, Olshan A, Barnett ML, Vincent JW. Reduction of viable bacteria in dental aerosols by preprocedural rinsing with 
an antiseptic mouthrinse. Am J Dent 1993;6:219--21. 

 397. Fine DH, Yip J, Furgang D, Barnett ML, Olshan AM, Vincent J. Reducing bacteria in dental aerosols: pre-procedural use of an antiseptic 
mouth rinse. J Am Dent Assoc 1993;124:56--8. 

 398. Logothetis DD, Martinez-Welles JM. Reducing bacterial aerosol contamination with a chlorhexidine gluconate pre-rinse. J Am Dent 

Assoc 1995;126:1634--9. 

 399. Klyn SL, Cummings DE, Richardson BW, Davis RD. Reduction of bacteria-containing spray produced during ultrasonic scaling. Gen 
Dent 2001;49:648--52. 

 400. Brown AR, Papasian CJ, Shultz P, Theisen FC, Shultz RE. Bacteremia and intraoral suture removal: can an antimicrobial rinse help? J Am Dent 
Assoc 1998;129:1455--61. 

 401. Lockhart PB. An analysis of bacteremias during dental extractions. A double-blind, placebo-controlled study of chlorhexidine. Arch Intern 
Med 1996;156:513--20. 

 402. Dajani AS, Bisno AL, Chung KJ, et al. Prevention of bacterial endocarditis: recommendations by the American Heart Association. 
JAMA 1997;277:1794--1801. 

 403. Tate WH, White RR. Disinfection of human teeth for educational purposes. J Dent Educ 1991;55:583--5. 

 404. Pantera EA Jr, Zambon JJ, Shih-Levine M. Indirect immunofluorescence for the detection of 
Bacteroides species in human dental pulp. J 
Endodontics 1988;14:218--23. 

 405. Pantera EA Jr, Schuster GS. Sterilization of extracted human teeth. J Dent Educ 1990;54:283--5. 

 406. Parsell DE, Stewart BM, Barker JR, Nick TG, Karns L, Johnson RB. The effect of steam sterilization on the physical properties and perceived 
cutting characteristics of extracted teeth. J Dent Educ 1998; 62;260--3. 

 407. American Dental Association's Council on Scientific Affairs and Council on Dental Practice. Infection control recommendations for the dental 
office and the dental laboratory. J Am Dent Assoc 1996;127:672--80. 

 408. Dental Laboratory Relationship Working Group, Organization for Safety and Asepsis Procedures (OSAP). Laboratory asepsis position 
paper. Annapolis, MD: OSAP Foundation, 1998. Available at 
 http://www.osap.org/issues/pages/position/LAB.pdf. 

 409. Kugel G, Perry RD, Ferrari M, Lalicata P. Disinfection and communication practices: a survey of U. S. dental laboratories. J Am Dent 
Assoc 2000;131:786--92. 

 410. US Department of Transportation. 49 CFR 173.196 infectious substances (etiologic agents) 173.197 regulated medical waste. Available at 
 http://www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/waisidx_02/49cfr173_02.html. 

 411. Chau VB, Saunders TR, Pimsler M, Elfring DR. In-depth disinfection of acrylic resins. J Prosthet Dent 1995;74:309--13. 

 412. Powell GL, Runnells RD, Saxon BA, Whisenant BK. The presence and identification of organisms transmitted to dental laboratories. J Prosthet 
Dent 1990;64:235--7. 

 413. Giblin J, Podesta R, White J. Dimensional stability of impression materials immersed in an iodophor disinfectant. Int J Prosthodont 1990;3:72--7. 

 414. Plummer KD, Wakefield CW. Practical infection control in dental laboratories. Gen Dent 1994;42:545--8. 

 415. Merchant VA. Infection control in the dental laboratory equipment [Chapter 16]. In: Cottone JA, Terezhalamy GT, Molinari JA, eds. 
Practical infection control in dentisty. 
2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1996:239--54. 

 416. Molinari J. Dental. In: Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc. (APIC). APIC text of infection control 
and epidemiology. Washington, DC: Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc, 2002. 

 417. Sofou A, Larsen T, Fiehn NE, Owall B. Contamination level of alginate impressions arriving at a dental laboratory. Clin Oral Invest 2002;6:161--5. 

 418. McNeill MR, Coulter WA, Hussey DL. Disinfection of irreversible hydrocolloid impressions: a comparative study. Int J Prosthodont 1992;5:563--7. 

 419. Gerhardt DE, Sydiskis RJ. Impression materials and virus. J Am Dent Assoc 1991;122:51--4. 

 420. Leung RL, Schonfeld SE. Gypsum casts as a potential source of microbial cross-contamination. J Prosthet Dent 1983;49:210--1. 

 421. Huizing KL, Palenik CJ, Setcos JC, Sheldrake MA, Miller, CH. Method of evaluating the antimicrobial abilities of disinfectant-containing 
gypsum products. QDT Yearbook 1994;17:172--6. 

 422. Verran J, Kossar S, McCord JF. Microbiological study of selected risk areas in dental technology laboratories. J Dent 1996;24:77--80. 

 423. CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. NIOSH Health Hazard Evaluation and Technical Assistance Report. Cincinnati, 
OH: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 1988. 
HETA 85-136-1932. 

 424. CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. NIOSH Health Hazard Evaluation and Technical Assistance Report. Cincinnati, 
OH: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 1990. 
HETA 88-101-2008.

 425. CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. Control of smoke from laser/electric surgical procedures. Cincinnati, OH: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 1996. 
DHHS publication no. (NIOSH) 96-128. 

 426. Taravella MJ, Weinberg A, Blackburn P, May M. Do intact viral particles survive excimer laser ablation? Arch Ophthalmol 1997;115:1028--30.

 427. Hagen KB, Kettering JD, Aprecio RM, Beltran F, Maloney RK. Lack of virus transmission by the excimer laser plume. Am J 
Ophthalmol 1997;124:206--11. 

 428. Kunachak S, Sithisarn P, Kulapaditharom B. Are laryngeal papilloma virus-infected cells viable in the plume derived from a continuous mode 
carbon dioxide laser, and are they infectious? A preliminary report on one laser mode. J Laryng Otol 1996;110:1031--3. 

 429. Hughes PS, Hughes AP. Absence of human papillomavirus DNA in the plume of erbium: YAG laser-treated warts. J Am Acad Dermatol 
1998;38:426--8. 

 430. Garden JM, O'Banion MK, Shelnitz LS, et al. Papillomavirus in the vapor of carbon dioxide laser-treated verrucae. JAMA 1988;259: 1199--1202. 

 431. Sawchuk WS, Weber PJ, Lowry DR, Dzubow LM. Infectious papillomavirus in the vapor of warts treated with carbon dioxide laser 
or electrocoagulation: detection and protection. J Am Acad Dermatol 1989;21:41--9. 

 432. Baggish MS, Poiesz BJ, Joret D, Williamson P, Rafai A. Presence of human immunodeficiency virus DNA in laser smoke. Lasers Surg 
Med 1991;11:197--203. 

 433. Capizzi PJ, Clay RP, Battey MJ. Microbiologic activity in laser resurfacing plume and debris. Lasers Surg Med 1998;23:172--4. 

 434. McKinley IB Jr, Ludlow MO. Hazards of laser smoke during endodontic therapy. J 

Endodontics 1994;20:558--9. 

 435. Favero MS, Bolyard EA. Microbiologic considerations. Disinfection and sterilization strategies and the potential for airborne transmission 
of bloodborne pathogens. Surg Clin North Am 1995;75:1071--89. 

 436. Association of Operating Room Nurses. Recommended practices for laser safety in the practice setting. In: Fogg D, ed. Standards, 
recommended practices and guidelines. Denver, CO: AORN, 2003. 

 437. Streifel AJ. Recognizing IAQ risk and implementing an IAQ program. In: Hansen W, ed. A guide to managing indoor air quality in health 
care organizations. Oakbrook Terrace, IL: Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations Publishers, 1997. 

 438. US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Safety and health topics: laser/electrosurgery plume. Washington DC: 
US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 2003. Available at 

 http://www.osha-slc.gov/SLTC/laserelectrosurgeryplume. 

 439. American Thoracic Society, CDC. Diagnostic standards and classification of tuberculosis in adults and children. Am J Resp Crit Care 
2000;161:1376--95. 

 440. Wells WF. Aerodynamics of droplet nuclei [Chapter 3]. In: Wells WF, ed. Airborne contagion and air hygiene: an ecological study of 
droplet infections. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1955. 

 441. CDC. Prevention and treatment of tuberculosis among patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus: principles of therapy and 
revised recommendations. MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-20). 

 442. Smith WH, Davies D, Mason KD, Onions JP. Intraoral and pulmonary tuberculosis following dental treatment. Lancet 1982;1:842--4. 

 443. CDC. Self-reported tuberculin skin testing among Indian Health Service and Bureau of Prisons dentists, 1993. MMWR 1994;43:209--11. 

 444. Mikitka D, Mills SE, Dazey SE, Gabriel ME. Tuberculosis infection in US Air Force dentists. Am J Dent 1995;8:33--6. 

 445. CDC. World Health Organization consultation on public health issues related to bovine spongiform encephalopathy and the emergence of a new 
variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease. MMWR 1996;45:295--6.

 446. CDC. Surveillance for Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease---United States. MMWR 1996;45:665--8. 

 447. Johnson RT, Gibbs CJ Jr. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and related transmissible spongiform encephalopathies. N Engl J Med 1998;339: 1994--2004. 

 448. CDC. New variant CJD: fact sheet. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, CDC, 2003. Available 
at http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/cjd/cjd_fact_sheet.htm. 

 449. Will RG, Ironside JW, Zeidler M, et al. A new variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in the UK. Lancet 1996;347:921--5. 

 450. Bruce ME, Will RG, Ironside JW, et al. Transmission to mice indicate that `new variant' CJD is caused by the BSE agent. Nature 1997;389: 498--501. 

 451. Collinge J, Sidle KC, Meads J, Ironside J, Hill AF. Molecular analysis of prion strain variation and the aetiology of `new variant' CJD. 
Nature 1996;383:685--90. 

 452. World Health Organization. Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE). Fact Sheet No. 113. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization, 
2002. Available at http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs113/en/. 

 453. CDC. Probable variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in a U.S. resident---Florida, 2002. MMWR 2002;51:927--9. 

 454. Hill AF, Butterworth RJ, Joiner S, et al. Investigation of variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and other human prion diseases with tonsil 
biopsy specimens. Lancet 1999;353:183--9. 

 455. Brown P, Gibbs CJ Jr, Rodgers-Johnson P, et al. Human spongiform encephalopathy: the National Institutes of Health series of 300 cases 
of experimentally transmitted disease. Ann Neurol 1994;35:513--29. 

 456. Brown P. Environmental causes of human spongiform encephalopathy [Chapter 8]. In: Baker HF, Baker HF, eds. Prion diseases. Totowa, NJ: 
Humana Press Inc, 1996:139--54. 

 457. Carp RI. Transmission of scrapie by oral route: effect of gingival scarification. Lancet 1982;1:170--1. 

 458. Ingrosso L, Pisani F, Pocchiari M. Transmission of the 263K scrapie strain by the dental route. J Gen Virol 1999;80:3043--7. 

 459. Bernoulli C, Siegfried J, Baumgartner G, et al. Danger of accidental person-to-person transmission of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease by surgery. 
Lancet 1977;1:478--9. 

 460. Brown P, Gajdusek DC, Gibbs CJ Jr, Asher DM. Potential epidemic of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease from human growth hormone therapy. N Engl 
J Med 1985;313:728--31. 

 461. CDC. Fatal degenerative neurologic disease in patients who received pituitary-derived human growth hormone. MMWR 1985;34:359--60, 365--6. 

 462. Duffy P, Wolf J, Collins G, DeVoe AG, Streeten B, Cowen D. Possible person-to-person transmission of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. N Engl J 
Med 1974;290:692--3. 

 463. CDC. Epidemiologic notes and reports: rapidly progressive dementia in a patient who received a cadaveric dura mater graft. MMWR 
1987;36:49--50, 55. 

 464. Thadani V, Penar PL, Partington J, et al. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease probably acquired from a cadaveric dura mater graft. Case report. J 
Neurosurg 1988;69:766--9. 

 465. Kondo K, Kuroiwa Y. A case control study of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease: association with physical injuries. Ann Neurol 1982;11:377--81. 

 466. Van Duijn CM, Delasnerie-Laupretre N, Masullo C, et al, and European Union (EU) Collaborative Study Group of Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease 
(CJD). Case-control study of risk factors of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in Europe during 1993--95. Lancet 1998;351:1081--5. 

 467. Collins S, Law MG, Fletcher A, Boyd A, Kaldor J, Masters CL. Surgical treatment and risk of sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease: a case-control 
study. Lancet 1999;353:693--7. 

 468. Blanquet-Grossard F, Sazdovitch V, Jean A, et al. Prion protein is not detectable in dental pulp from patients with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. J 
Dent Res 2000;79:700. 

 469. World Health Organization. Infection control guidelines for transmissible spongiform encephalopathies: report of a WHO consultation, 
Geneva, Switzerland, 23--26 March 1999. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization, 2000. Available at 

 http://www.who.int/emc-documents/tse/whocdscsraph2003c.html.

 470. Institute of Medicine, Committee on Quality of Health Care in America. Kohn LT, Corrigan JM, Donadlson MS, eds. To err is human: building 
a safe health system. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1999. 

 471. CDC. Framework for program evaluation in public health. MMWR 1999;48(No. RR-11). 

Advisory Group

Joseph A. Bartoloni, D.M.D., United States Air Force Dental Investigation Service, Great Lakes, Illinois; Nancy Bjerke, M.A., M.Ed., M.P.H., Infection Control Associates, San Antonio, Texas; Walter W. Bond, M.S., RCSA Inc., Lawrenceville, Georgia; Eve Cuny, M.S., University of Pacific School of Dentistry, San Francisco, California; Kathy J. Eklund, M.H.P., Forsyth Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; Curt Hamann, M.D., Smart Practice, 

Phoenix, Arizona; Jennifer A. Harte, D.D.S., United States Air Force Dental Investigation Service, Great Lakes, Illinois; Chris Miller, Ph.D., Indiana University School of Dentistry, Bloomington, Indiana; Shannon E. Mills, D.D.S., Air Force Medical Operations Agency, Bolling AFB, Washington, District of Columbia; John Molinari, Ph.D., University of Detroit Mercy School of Dentistry, Detroit, Michigan; William A. Rutala, Ph.D., University of 
North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; Brian Shearer, Ph.D., Bayer, Inc., Chicago, Illinois.

CDC Consultants

Matthew Arduino, Dr.P.H., Elizabeth Bolyard, M.P.H., Denise Cardo, M.D., Joe Carpenter, Linda Chiarello, M.P.H., Lynne Sehulster, Ph.D., Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for Infectious Diseases (NCID), Atlanta, Georgia; Miriam J. Alter, Ph.D., Division of Viral Hepatitis, NCID; Larry Schonberger, Ph.D., Ermias Belay, M.D., Division of Viral and Ricketsial Diseases, NCID, Atlanta, Georgia; Susan Y. Chu, Ph.D., National Immunization Program, Atlanta, Georgia; Paul A. Jensen, National Center for HIV, STD and TB Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia; Janice Huy, National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), Cincinnati, Ohio; Lee Petsonk, NIOSH, Morgantown, West Virginia; Jennifer L. 

Cleveland, D.D.S., Amy S. Collins, M.P.H., Barbara F. Gooch, D.M.D., William G. Kohn, D.D.S., Dolores M. Malvitz, Dr.P.H., Division of Oral Health, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Atlanta Georgia.

Other Federal Consultants

Susan Runner, D.D.S., Food and Drug Administration, Rockville, Maryland; Elise Handelman, Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration, Washington, District of Columbia; Jeffrey Kempter, M.S., David Liem, Ph.D., Michelle Wingfield, Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, District of Columbia.

Outside Consultants

Martin S. Favero, Ph.D., Advanced Sterilization Products, Johnson and Johnson, Irvine, California; Pamela Rodgers, Ph.D., SmartHealth Inc., Phoenix, Arizona; Daniel M. Meyer, D.D.S., American Dental Association, Chicago, Illinois; Deborah Greenspan, BDS, DSC University of California 

San Francisco School of Dentistry, San Francisco, California; Helene Bednarsh, Boston Department of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts; Steve Peake, Barnstead-Harvey Corp, Dubuque, Iowa; Chakwan Siew, Ph.D., American Dental Association, Chicago, Illinois.

Table 1

Return to top.

Table 2

Return to top.

Table 3

Return to top.

Table 4

Return to top.

Table 5

Return to top.

Box

Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.

Disclaimer

All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML. This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in the HTML version. 
Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the electronic PDF version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables. 
An original paper copy of this issue can be obtained from the Superintendent of Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202) 512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.

**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 12/9/2003

 HOME | 
 ABOUT MMWR | 
 MMWR SEARCH | 
 DOWNLOADS | 
 RSS 
 | 
 CONTACT

 POLICY | 
 DISCLAIMER | 
 ACCESSIBILITY

 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report

 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

 1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
 30333, U.S.A

 Department of Health
and Human Services

 This page last reviewed 12/9/2003

